

* See page 31 for background information and a description of movement principles. 


191 


MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES 










THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 



Teacher prompt: "Why do you need to consider etiquette and how to work well with 
others when engaging in various kinds of activities?" 

Student: "When doing an activity with others, you need to be able to work together to 
agree on things like team selection, rules, equipment, and boundaries. If teams are un¬ 
even or rules make the activity too challenging, the game isn't fun. Rules of etiquette are 
needed to ensure that people show respect for each other. Even with individual activities, 
you need to be aware of proper etiquette in relation to others. For example, when jog¬ 
ging, you show respect for others when passing on sidewalks. Another part of etiquette 
is showing that you respect the environment as well as other people. For example, you 
could show that you respect the environment when running by staying on trails or path¬ 
ways rather than running off the path." 


B2.2 describe and compare different categories of physical activities* (e.g., individual, target, net/ 

wall, striking/fielding, territory), and describe strategies that they found effective while partici¬ 
pating in a variety of physical activities in different categories [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "Territory games such as lacrosse, basketball, ultimate disc, rugby, 
soccer, broomball, speedball, ringette, wheelchair basketball, goal ball, and sledge hockey 
all involve controlling an object, keeping it away from opponents, and working together 
as a team to move it across the playing area until someone on the team can score. These 
games commonly involve the use of kicking, carrying, running, and/or throwing skills. 
Territory games have the most complex structures of all of the game categories because of 
the number of variables and the number of people involved. What strategies might you 
apply in any territory game?" 

Student: "Teamwork is very important in all of these games. When you or your team has 
the object, important strategies involve focusing on ways of working together as a team 
to keep possession of the object, moving it down the playing area, and getting into an 
open space so you can either receive a pass or get a clear shot at the goal. When you do 
not have the object, important strategies include working together as a team to try to 
regain possession of the object by staying between the offensive player and the goal, 
and using your hands, feet, or stick (depending on the game) to keep your opponent 
from scoring." 


Teacher prompt: "Territory games often involve fast transitions from offence to defence. 
How is this different from net/wall activities, striking/fielding activities, or target 
activities?" 

Student: "Because the transition from offence to defence is often very quick in territory 
activities, players need to be ready to switch directions and strategies as the play changes. 
That also happens in net/wall activities, but in those games, each team stays on its own 
court while changing from offence to defence. In striking/fielding and target activities, 
there is a stop in the game as teams switch from offence to defence, so the pace is slower 
and more controlled." 


Teacher prompt: "Consider what is similar about activities like canoeing, triathlons, and 
track and field. What do these activities have in common, and what strategies might you 
use in all of these activities?" 


* See pages 32-34 for background information and a description of various categories of physical activities. 


192 








Student: "These activities all involve a combination of skills. With canoeing, you need to 
paddle, but often you also need to be able to carry the canoe. A triathlon involves swim¬ 
ming, biking, and running. There are a number of activities in track and field, including 
running races of different distances and different types of jumps and throws. In each of 
these activities, you need to practise and develop your fitness to improve. Strategies for 
all these activities focus on pacing and on planning transitions from one phase of the ac¬ 
tivity to another." 


B2.3 apply a variety of tactical solutions to increase chances of success as they participate in 

physical activities (e.g., individual activities: practise a dance or gymnastics sequence in parts to 
refine each move, then put it back together in a sequence; target activities: adjust force when sending 
the object so that it will stop or land in a position to block the opponent; netlwall activities: zvork 
with teammates to cover space effectively; striking!fielding activities: hit or kick in different zvays, 
varying the distance the object is sent, so that it will be more difficult for opponents to field and return 
the object; territory activities: use a "give and go" by sending the object to a teammate (give) then 
running to an open space to receive the object back again from the teammate (go); kick a leading pass 
to a moving teammate to maintain possession) [IS, CT]* 

Teacher prompt: "How do you make it difficult for opponents to hit the ball in striking/ 

fielding activities?" 

Student: "Change the speed and pathway of the ball. Change the level of the throw. 

Put a spin on the ball." 



* The types of living skills associated with students' application of tactical solutions differ with the students' developmental 
stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At 
the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater 
or lesser degree. In Grades 1-3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills; in Grades 4-6, most students are 
ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions; and in Grades 7 and 8, most are prepared to focus their 
energy on the thinking skills involved (e.g., transferring understanding from one activity to another; applying systems thinking by 
transferring their learning from a specific context to a more global context, as in considering the environmental benefits as well as the 
fitness and recreational benefits of using active transportation; including a variety of different moves in a creative way in a dance or 
fitness routine). 


193 


MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES 






THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 



C. HEALTHY LIVING 


Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 7: Key Topics* 

Topic 

Cl. Understanding 
Health Concepts 

C2. Making 
Healthy Choices 

C3. Making Connections 
for Healthy Living 

Healthy Eating 


C2.1 Food choices and 
health problems [CT] 

C3.1 Healthy eating practices 
and routines 

Personal Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 

C1.1 Benefits and dangers - 
technology 

C2.2 Impact - bullying/ 
harassment [IS, CT] 


Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

Cl.2 Mental health,substances, 
support [PS] 

C2.3 Body image, substance 
use [PS, CT] 

C3.2 Implications of 
substance use and addictions 
[CT] 

Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl.3 Delaying sexual activity 

Cl .4 Sexually transmitted 
infections (STIs) 

Cl .5 STI and pregnancy 
prevention 

C2.4 Sexual health and 
decision making [PS] 

C3.3 Relationship changes at 
puberty [IS, CT] 


* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1-8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 224-225. The topics 
are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand. 


OVERALL EXPECTATIONS 

By the end of Grade 7, students will: 

Cl. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development; 

C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions 
and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being; 

C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being - how their 
choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around 
them affect their own and others' health and well-being. 


SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS 


Cl. Understanding Health Concepts 


By the end of Grade 7, students will: 

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention 

Cl .1 describe benefits and dangers, for themselves and others, that are associated with the use of 
computers and other technologies (e.g., benefits: saving time; increased access to information; im¬ 
proved communication, including global access; dangers: misuse of private information; identity theft; 
cyberstalking; hearing damage and/or traffic injuries from earphone use; financial losses from online 
gambling; potential for addiction), and identify protective responses 


194 





















Teacher prompt: "What are some ways of protecting your safety when using a computer 
at home or in a public place?" 

Student: "Everyone should be aware that anything they write or post could become pub¬ 
lic information. If you do not want someone else to know about something, you should 
not write about it or post it. You should never share your password. If you are a target of 
online harassment, you should save and print the messages you received and get help 
from a parent, teacher, or other trusted adult." 


Teacher prompt: "Sexting - or the practice of sending explicit sexual messages or 
photos electronically, predominantly by cell phone - is a practice that has significant 
risks. What are some of those risks? What can you do to minimize those risks and treat 
others with respect?" 

Students: "Photos and messages can become public even if shared for only a second. 
They can be manipulated or misinterpreted. If they become public, they can have an 
impact on the well-being of the persons involved, their future relationships, and even 
their jobs. There are also legal penalties for anyone sharing images without consent." 
"You shouldn't pressure people to send photos of themselves. If someone does send 
you a photo, you should not send it to anyone else or share it online, because respecting 
privacy and treating others with respect are just as important with online technology as 
with face-to-face interactions." 


Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours 

Cl .2 demonstrate an understanding of linkages between mental health problems and problematic 
substance use, and identify school and community resources (e.g., trusted adidts at school, guid¬ 
ance counsellors, public health services, community elders, help lines) that can provide support for 
mental health concerns relating to substance use, addictions, and related behaviours [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Problematic substance use is a term that refers to the use of substances in 
ways that are potentially harmful. It includes both substance misuse, which is the use of 
substances in ways that are illegal or not recommended medically, and substance abuse, 
which involves excessive use of substances despite the physical, mental, emotional, social, 
legal, or economic harm that this may cause to oneself or others. Problematic substance 
use and mental health problems are often closely connected. Many people suffer from both, 
although it is important to note that one doesn't necessarily cause the other. In some cases, 
the causes may be quite different, or both may be caused by a common factor, which could 
be genetic, developmental, or environmental. For example, traumatic events (an environ¬ 
mental factor) can lead to both mental health and substance use problems. In other cases, 
mental health problems may contribute to problematic substance use: alcohol and drugs 
may be used as a means to cope with a mental health problem and may make the symp¬ 
toms worse. Conversely, long-term drug use can lead to a loss of contact with reality and 
to the development of delusions and other psychotic symptoms similar to those seen 
with some mental health problems. What are some mental health problems that are 
sometimes connected with problematic substance use?" 

Student: "Depression, eating disorders, anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder, and schizo¬ 
phrenia are sometimes associated with problematic substance use." 



Human Development and Sexual Health 

Cl .3 explain the importance of having a shared understanding with a partner about the following: 
delaying sexual activity until they are older (e.g., choosing to abstain from any genital contact; 
choosing to abstain from having vaginal or anal intercourse; choosing to abstain from having oral-genital 
contact); the reasons for not engaging in sexual activity; the concept of consent and how consent 
is communicated; and, in general, the need to communicate clearly with each other when 
making decisions about sexual activity in the relationship 


195 


HEALTHY LIVING 







THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 



Teacher prompt: "The term abstinence can mean different things to different people. 

People can also have different understandings of what is meant by having or not having 
sex. Be clear in your own mind about what you are comfortable or uncomfortable with. 
Being able to talk about this with a partner is an important part of sexual health. Having 
sex can be an enjoyable experience and can be an important part of a close relationship 
when you are older. But having sex has risks too, including physical risks like sexually 
transmitted infections - which are common and which can hurt you - and getting 
pregnant when you don't want to. What are some of the emotional considerations 
to think about?" 

Student: "It's best to wait until you are older to have sex because you need to be emotion¬ 
ally ready, which includes being able to talk with your partner about how you feel, being 
prepared to talk about and use protection against STIs or pregnancy, and being prepared 
to handle the emotional ups and downs of a relationship, including the ending of a rela¬ 
tionship, which can hurt a lot. Personal values, family values, and religious beliefs can 
influence how you think about sexuality and sexual activity. A person should not have 
sex if their partner is not ready or has not given consent, if they are feeling pressured, if 
they are unsure, or if they are under the influence of drugs or alcohol." 


Cl .4 identify common sexually transmitted infections (STIs), and describe their symptoms 

Teacher prompt: "Common sexually transmitted infections include human papilloma¬ 
virus (HPV), herpes, chlamydia, gonorrhea, and hepatitis B. Some have visible symptoms 
but most do not, so it's hard to tell if you or someone else has an STI. All STIs can have a 
significant impact on your health. What are some symptoms of an STI? If an STI has no 
symptoms, how can you find out if you have it?" 

Student: "You can see some STIs, such as pubic lice or genital warts, and other STIs have 
symptoms such as redness or pain while urinating. Even if you don't see or experience 
any symptoms, you should be tested by a doctor if you are sexually active. Depending on 
the STI, tests can be done by taking swabs from the cervix, vagina, or urethra or by taking 
urine or blood samples." 


Cl .5 identify ways of preventing STIs, including HIV, and/or unintended pregnancy, such as 
delaying first intercourse and other sexual activities until a person is older and using con¬ 
doms consistently if and when a person becomes sexually active 

Teacher prompt: "Engaging in sexual activities like oral sex, vaginal intercourse, and anal 
intercourse means that you can be infected with an STI. If you do not have sex, you do 
not need to worry about getting an STI. (By the way, statistics show that young people 
who delay first intercourse are more likely to use protection when they choose to be 
sexually active.) If a person is thinking of having sex, what can they do to protect 
themselves?" 

Student: "They should go to a health clinic or see a nurse or doctor who can provide 
important information about protection. People who think they will be having sex some¬ 
time soon should keep a condom with them so they will have it when they need it. They 
should also talk with their partner about using a condom before they have sex, so both 
partners will know a condom will be used. If a partner says they do not want to use a 
condom, a person should say, 'I will not have sex without a condom.' If you do have sex, 
it is important that you use a condom every time, because condoms help to protect you 
against STIs, including HIV, and pregnancy." 


196 







Teacher prompt: "HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) is a serious viral infection 
that can be controlled with treatments. HIV attacks the cells in the body that help to fight 
infections until they are no longer able to do their job. With treatment, the damage that 
HIV does to the body's immune system can be slowed or prevented. But HIV infection 
cannot be cured. The only way to know if you have HIV is to get an HIV test. Today, 
when people get tested for HIV early in the infection and access HIV treatments, they 
have the opportunity to live a near-to-normal lifespan. HIV can lead to AIDS (Acquired 
Immune Deficiency Syndrome), a state of health in which a person's immune system has 
been weakened by HIV and the person can no longer fight other infections. It is common 
for a person with AIDS to develop other infections, such as pneumonia or some kinds of 
cancer. HIV can be transmitted whether or not someone has symptoms of the infection. 
However, HIV treatment can reduce the amount of HIV in someone's body to the point 
where it is much less likely that HIV will be transmitted. HIV transmission results from 
specific activities and does not occur through everyday contact with someone living with 
HIV/ AIDS. What are some of the ways a person can be infected with HIV, and what can 
be done to prevent the transmission of HIV?" 

Student: "HIV is transmitted through contact with bodily fluids - semen, blood, vaginal 
or anal fluid, and breast milk. HIV cannot live outside the body. For you to be infected, 
the virus must enter your bloodstream. That can happen through the sharing of needles 
as well as through unprotected sexual intercourse, which is the most common method of 
infection. To prevent the transmission of HIV, avoid behaviours associated with greater 
risks of HIV transmission, like vaginal or anal intercourse without a condom and injection 
drug use. It is very important that you use a condom if you do have sex. Avoid sharing 
drug use equipment or using needles that have not been sterilized for any purpose, includ¬ 
ing piercing, tattooing, or injecting steroids. One of the best things you can do to stop HIV 
is to stop the stigma that is associated with having the infection. Gossiping about someone 
with HIV or avoiding everyday contact with them makes it more challenging for people to 
tell others that they have HIV or to get tested for HIV. These things make it easier for HIV 
to spread." 



C2. Making Healthy Choices 


By the end of Grade 7, students will: 

Healthy Eating 

C2.1 demonstrate the ability to make healthier food choices, using information about the role 

that different foods play as contributing or preventive factors in a variety of health disorders 
(e.g., cancer, Type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, obesity, food allergies and anaphylaxis, tooth 
decay, osteoporosis) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "What you eat can contribute positively to your overall health, but it can 
also contribute to health problems. Eating healthy foods gives you the vitamins, minerals, 
and nutrients you need to be healthy. An unhealthy diet is one of many factors, including 
obesity, physical inactivity, smoking, and high blood pressure, that can increase the risk 
of illness and disease. Fruit and vegetable consumption helps protect against a variety 
of cancers, whereas a diet high in red meat and processed meat has been linked to an in¬ 
creased risk of cancer. Avoiding sticky foods and following good oral hygiene practices 
helps reduce the risk of tooth decay. Getting enough calcium from dairy products, calcium- 
fortified soy beverages, vegetables, and fish or meat alternatives when your bones are 
growing can help prevent the development of osteoporosis in later years. Avoiding high- 
fat foods can help reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and obesity. A healthy diet 
that follows the recommendations of Canada's Food Guide, contains plenty of fruits and 
vegetables and high-fibre foods, and avoids unhealthy (saturated and trans) fats can help 
you maintain a healthy weight and prevent illness." 


197 


HEALTHY LIVING 







THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 



Personal Safety and Injury Prevention 

C2.2 assess the impact of different types of bullying or harassment, including the harassment 

and coercion that can occur with behaviours such as sexting, on themselves and others, and 
identify ways of preventing or resolving such incidents (e.g., communicating feelings; reporting 
incidents involving themselves or others; encouraging others to understand the social responsibility to 
report incidents and support others rather than maintaining a code of silence or viewing reporting as 
"ratting"; seeking help from support services; learning skills for emotional regulation; using strategies 
for defusing tense or potentially violent situations) [IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: "What are some of the consequences of using homophobic put-downs 
or racial slurs? How can this hurtful behaviour be prevented?" 

Student: "Using homophobic or racist language is discriminatory. It hurts the people 
who are targeted and it can have harmful consequences for the whole atmosphere in the 
school. Sometimes, people speak without thinking about what they are actually saying 
and how they are hurting others. To change this behaviour, everyone needs to take re¬ 
sponsibility for the words they use and also to challenge others who make discriminatory 
comments or put people down, whether in person or online." 


Teacher prompt: "Inappropriate sexual behaviour, including things like touching 
someone's body as they walk by in the hall, making sexual comments, or pulling pieces 
of clothing up or down, is sexual harassment. Texting someone constantly can also be 
harassment. What can you do to stop this kind of thing?" 

Students: "Don't do it. Don't encourage others to do it. Don't accept it if you see it 
happening - whether in person or on social media. Tell the person to stop, or report 
them." "Online, you can call someone on unacceptable language, but it's better to 
have a face-to-face conversation about it afterwards." 


Teacher prompt: "A common form of harassment is spreading hurtful gossip about others. 
Is this type of bullying any less harmful than physical bullying? How can it be stopped?" 

Student: "Verbal and social bullying and harassment - whether done in person, online, or 
through texting - are just as harmful as physical bullying. There are legal consequences 
for physical assault and for verbal harassment. If we hear it or see it, we should not 
accept it. It is up to everyone to make sure that this is not an acceptable thing to do." 


Teacher prompt: "What kind of support will the person who was bullied and the 
bystander need?" 

Student: "They need to be listened to and given a chance to express their feelings about 
the harm that has been done and to contribute their ideas about what needs to be done 
to put things right. They need to be given help to make sure the bullying stops. They 
might be afraid and may need counselling to recover emotionally from being bullied 
or witnessing bullying." 

Teacher: "Repair processes such as restorative justice might be put in place for the person 
who did the bullying in order to prevent the incident from happening again. Restorative 
justice puts the emphasis on the wrong done to the person as well as the wrong done to 
the community. It requires wrongdoers to recognize the harm they have caused, accept 
responsibility for their actions, and be actively involved in improving the situation. 

What has to occur before this can happen?" 


198 







Student: "The person who did the bullying has to admit guilt and accept responsibility 
for his or her actions. He or she needs to participate willingly in the process. The person 
who was targeted also needs to participate willingly, without feeling pressured. It is really 
important for their participation to be voluntary and for the process of restorative justice 
not to cause further harm. Trained facilitators can make sure that the restorative justice 
program is helpful to everyone." 


Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours 

C2.3 explain how preoccupation with body image or athletic performance can contribute to 

substance abuse (e.g., misuse of supplements, vitamins, diuretics, diet pills, laxatives, steroids, or 
performance-enhancing drugs), and demonstrate the ability to make informed choices about 
caring for their bodies [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: "What are the dangers of using substances to alter body shape? What is 
a healthier alternative?" 

Student: "Using substances to change body shape or to control weight is dangerous 
because of the hazards associated with different substances. Diet pills and laxatives 
can cause dehydration. Steroids have many side effects, including increased irritability, 
aggressiveness, mood swings, acne, changes in sex organs, hair loss, and addiction. 
Prolonged use of high dosages can lead to organ damage. A balanced combination of 
healthy eating and physical activity is a safer and healthier alternative to using drugs." 


Human Development and Sexual Health 

C2.4 demonstrate an understanding of physical, emotional, social, and psychological factors that 
need to be considered when making decisions related to sexual health (e.g., sexually transmitted 
infections [STIs], possible contraceptive side effects, pregnancy, protective value of vaccinations, social 
labelling, gender identity, sexual orientation, self-concept issues, relationships, desire, pleasure, cultural 
teachings) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: "Thinking about your sexual health is complicated. It's important to 
have a good understanding of yourself before getting involved with someone else. It's 
not just about making a decision to have sex or waiting until you are older. It's also about 
things such as your physical readiness; safer sex and avoiding consequences such as 
pregnancy or STIs; your sexual orientation and gender identity; your understanding of 
your own body, including what gives you pleasure; and the emotional implications of 
sexual intimacy and being in a relationship. It can include religious beliefs. It includes 
moral and ethical considerations as well, and also involves the need to respect the rights 
of other people. Can you explain what is meant by a moral consideration?" 

Student: "A moral consideration is what you believe is right or wrong. It is influenced by 
your personal, family, and religious values. Every person in our society should treat other 
people fairly and with respect. It is important to take this into account when we think 
about our relationships, sexual behaviour, and activities." 

Teacher: "Like any other decision, a decision about sexual health requires you to look at 
all sides of an issue. How can you do that?" 

Student: "You need to consider the pros and cons of any decision you are making, and 
how those decisions will affect both you and others." 



199 


HEALTHY LIVING 






THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 



C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living 


By the end of Grade 7, students will: 

Healthy Eating 

C3.1 demonstrate an understanding of personal and external factors that affect people's food 
choices and eating routines (e.g., personal: likes and dislikes, busy schedules, food allergies or 
sensitivities, personal values, cultural practices or teachings; external: family budget, cost of foods, 
type of food available at home, at school, or in the community), and identify ways of encouraging 
healthier eating practices 

Teacher prompt: "How can people make healthy food choices if their choices are limited 
by a dislike of certain foods, by a food allergy, by personal beliefs about ethical food 
choices, by cultural preferences or religious food rules, or by budget limitations?" 

Student: "Some limitations can be removed or overcome. People often dislike certain 
foods without ever having tried them. We should always consider at least trying a food 
before rejecting it. Often we can learn to like a food by having it prepared or served in a 
different way. In other cases, we just have to work within the limitations. A lot of tasty 
food choices are available for people who are making ethical choices or following reli¬ 
gious and cultural food rules, or who have allergies. If we have a limited budget, we 
can still eat well by making careful food choices. Packaged foods are usually more 
expensive and less nutritious than fresh foods cooked at home. Local produce can be 
relatively inexpensive in season and can be more nutritious than imported or packaged 
fruits and vegetables." 


Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours 

C3.2 analyse the personal and societal implications of issues related to substance use and addictive 
behaviours (e.g., effect of technology dependence on school and workplace performance, personal rela¬ 
tionships, and physical health; risks associated with chewing tobacco; effects of second-hand smoke 
on non-smokers and children; legal and health implications of underage drinking; body damage and 
reputation loss among athletes as a result of the use of steroids and other performance-enhancing 
drugs; risk of HIV/AIDS with intravenous drug use; risk of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder [FASD] 
as a residt of alcohol abuse during pregnancy) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "Underage drinking is a concern in our school. Who can be harmed by 
underage drinking, and how?" 

Student: "Underage drinking can be harmful to the person doing it because it can lead to 
legal charges and physical and emotional harm. Alcohol abuse is connected to violence in 
relationships and to unwanted pregnancies, so other people are hurt by it. Intoxication 
can also lead to taking more risks and can result in injury or death. Alcohol poisoning can 
even be fatal. Underage drinking can be harmful to family members and the community 
because of the personal injuries or property damage that can result from actions or 
behaviour associated with impaired judgement, including car crashes. Irresponsible 
behaviour can damage not only the reputation of the person involved but also the 
reputation of teenagers in general. Underage drinkers also risk losing the trust of 
their parents and other adults." 


Human Development and Sexual Health 

C3.3 explain how relationships with others (e.g., family, peers) and sexual health may be affected by 
the physical and emotional changes associated with puberty (e.g., effect of physical maturation 
and emotional changes on family relationships, interest in intimate relationships and effect on peer 
relationships, risk ofSTIs and/or pregnancy with sexual contact) [IS, CT] 


200 








Teacher prompt: "How can the changes experienced in puberty affect relationships with 
family and others?" 

Student: "Adolescents may be interested in having a boyfriend/girlfriend. They may 
feel 'grown up', but still get treated like a kid, and this sometimes leads to conflicts with 
parents. They may want more independence." 





GRADE 8 


Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided 
to illustrate the intended learning - the concepts that students should understand and the 
skills they are to acquire - in connection with the particular expectation. The student 
responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, 
or word choice typical of students in the different grades. 






LIVING SKILLS 



OVERALL EXPECTATIONS 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 


1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes 
as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, 
Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade. 


SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS 



By the end of Grade 8, students will: 


Personal Skills (PS)* 


1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and 
needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own 
progress, as they participate in various physical activities, develop movement competence, 
and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: explain how 
knowing themselves - their likes, dislikes, strengths, and abilities - can help them determine which 
health-related and skill-related components of fitness to focus on when developing their fitness plan; 
Movement Competence: monitor improvements in their body control as they apply their understand¬ 
ing of the phases of movement - preparation, execution, follow-through - to the refinement of a variety 
of movement skills; Healthy Living: describe the importance of self-awareness in developing stress- 
management strategies) 

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges 
they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, 
and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: manage their 
improvement of different health-related components of fitness by monitoring the frequency of their 
physical activity, the intensity of their activity, the types of activities they choose, and the length of 
time they are being active; Movement Competence: experiment with shifting weight and changing 
body position to find ways to make smoother transitions when performing a series of balances with a 
partner; Healthy Living: identify the type of support that is available to help with the various physical, 
emotional, cultural, social, and psychological issues that can arise in connection with sexuality and 
sexual health) 


* The abbreviation! s) for the three categories of living skills - PS, IS, and CT - appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, 
in strands A-C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 23-25 for a discussion of living skills.) 









Interpersonal Skills (IS)* 


1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret 
information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement compe¬ 
tence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: give 
examples ofhozv to communicate information clearly and concisely in an emergency situation; 
Movement Competence: congratulate opponents on a good play in a sincere way; Healthy 
Living: make adjustments to suit particular audiences - parents, peers, younger students, 
community members - when communicating to promote healthy eating) 

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop move¬ 
ment competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them 
interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective team mem¬ 
bers (e.g., Active Living: cooperate with others by respecting their choice of activities; encourage 
others when participating in activities like cross-country running; Movement Competence: work 
with a partner to try out different types of passes to evade opponents; Healthy Living: explain the 
positive aspects and the risks associated with close personal relationships and different levels of 
physical intimacy) 


Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)* 

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking skills and processes to assist them in making 
connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, 
and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education 
(e.g., Active Living: track and analyse changes in their health-related components of fitness over 
a designated period of time, and make any necessary adjustments in their fitness plans; plan ways 
to promote the involvement of all the students in the school in “healthy schools" activities such 
as litterless lunch programs and active recess activities; Movement Competence: explain how 
developing movement competence and building confidence influence the extent to which people 
participate in physical activity; Healthy Living: analyse potentially dangerous situations and 
devise solutions for making them safer) 


o 

73 

> 

D 

m 

oo 


205 


LIVING SKILLS 




THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


A. ACTIVE LIVING 


00 

UJ 


SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS 


A1. Active Participation 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

A1.1 actively participate according to their capabilities in a wide variety of program activities (e.g., 
individual, small-group, and large-group activities; movement and rhythmic activities; dance; outdoor 
pursuits) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: "In the next ten minutes, you will have the opportunity to go to three 
different fitness stations. Think about what stations you will choose to visit." 

Student: “\ am going to pick two stations that connect to my fitness goals and one for fun. 
I am going to go to the exercise band station because I need to work on my arm strength. 

I am going to go to the stability ball station because I am working on my core strength 
and balance. I'm going to pick skipping as my third station because my friend and I are 
having a contest to see who can skip rope the longest without stopping." 


A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being 
active (e.g., being able to adapt activities to suit individual needs and preferences; having a choice of 
activities and choices within activities; being comfortable with the activities, both socially and emotion¬ 
ally; being able to take part in activities in a natural environment; being able to take part in activities 
that are culturally relevant), as they participate in a diverse range of physical activities in a 
variety of indoor and outdoor environments [PS] 

Teacher prompt: "In class, we play in different groups to experience working with 
different people who have different skill levels. What kinds of groups do you find most 
comfortable to participate in?" 

Student: "I'm comfortable playing with people who are at my skill level, but I also like 
playing with people who are better than I am, because it gives me a good challenge and 
I can learn from playing with them." 



OVERALL EXPECTATIONS 

By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities, and demonstrate an 
understanding of how personal motivational factors can be used to encourage participation in 
physical activity; 

A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active, and apply physical 
fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living; 

A3, demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in 
physical activities. 


Teacher prompt: "Activities are more enjoyable when you can play at a level that is 
challenging but still not too difficult. How does this badminton activity do this?" 


206 











Student: "With this activity, you can choose to serve the shuttle from any of three lines. 

If you choose the distance that allows you to get the shuttle over the net most of the time 
and into one of the three areas marked on the floor with pylons, then you are choosing 
the distance that is not too easy and not too hard." 


A1.3 demonstrate an understanding of factors that motivate personal participation in physical 

activities every day (e.g., gaining health benefits, including release from stress; having interpersonal 
interactions; becoming more independent in daily living activities; experiencing personal enjoyment), 
and explain how these factors can be used to influence others (e.g., friends, family, members of 
the community) to be physically active [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "How can your participation in physical activity have an impact 
on others?" 

Students: "By being active, you can be a good role model and influence others. At school 
I am a fitness buddy for a Grade 2 student. Our classes get together and we help the 
younger students participate in physical activities." "Sometimes just by participating, 
you can motivate others to join you. Because I play water polo, my younger sister wants 
to try it." "On the weekends when I go for a bike ride, my father often comes with me. 
He might not go out on his own if I were not going." 


A2. Physical Fitness 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 


o 

73 

> 

D 

m 

oo 


A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical 
activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability 
for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., capture the flag, four-corner soccer, ball 
fitness activities) [PS] 


A2.2 recognize the difference between health-related components of personal fitness (i.e., cardio¬ 
respiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility) and skill-related 
components (i.e., balance, agility, power, reaction time, speed, and coordination), and explain 
how to use training principles to enhance both components [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "How do you use training principles, such as considering the frequency 
and intensity of your workout and the timing and types of activities you choose, to im¬ 
prove your health-related fitness, particularly cardiorespiratory fitness? What do the 
Canadian Physical Activity Guidelines for Youth recommend?" 

Student: "I need to decide what activities to do, and how often and how long I need to be 
active to get the fitness benefits I want. To improve my cardiorespiratory fitness, I need to 
choose activities that will raise my heart rate and make my heart and lungs work harder. 
Doing something like swimming for forty minutes three days a week, for example, would 
improve my cardiorespiratory fitness. The physical activity guide recommends that 
young people improve their fitness by increasing the time they currently spend on 
physical activity each day and reducing non-active time." 


Teacher prompt: "Health-related components of fitness contribute to your overall health 
and well-being. Skill-related components of fitness help improve the quality of your 
movements during activity. Agility is a skill-related component of fitness. Explain what 
agility is. Why is it important?" 


207 


ACTIVE LIVING 









THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


00 

UJ 

D 

< 

cc 

u 


Student: "Agility is the ability to change directions and change smoothly and easily from 
one movement to another. It is helpful when playing sports like soccer or basketball but 
also when participating in recreational activities like in-line skating or skateboarding. 
Having good agility helps you move more smoothly and efficiently and makes the 
activity more fun." 


A2.3 assess their level of health-related fitness (i.e., cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular 

strength, muscular endurance, flexibility) during various physical activities and monitor 
changes in fitness levels over time (e.g., by tracking heart rates, recovery time, hozv they feel during 
and after activity, level of participation; noting increase in range of motion when doing yoga stretches; 
tracking increases in the number of repetitions when doing arm curls with exercise bands) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: "How has monitoring your work on different fitness components helped 
improve your fitness?" 

Student: "Seeing improvements over time has given me encouragement to keep working 
and become even more fit. Tracking my progress on different components has also helped 
me focus on those that need more work, so my overall fitness has become better." 


A2.4 develop, implement, and revise a personal plan to meet short- and long-term health-related 
fitness and physical activity goals [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: "What have you chosen as your goal? When setting your goal and 
developing your plan to achieve it, consider your time frame as well as your assessment 
information. Is your goal short-term or long-term? How do you know that your goal is 
realistic? How will you know whether you've achieved your goal? What will help you 
achieve your goal? How will achieving this goal help you?" 

Student: "I'm working at improving my long-distance running/wheeling to improve my 
overall fitness. I want to run/wheel the 1500-metre event at the track meet in the spring. 

I am also thinking of doing a 10K charity run/wheel. I think my goal is realistic. It is 
October, so this is a long-term goal - and I have time to train. And I did complete the 
1500-metre event last year, although it was fairly challenging. Here is my plan to accom¬ 
plish my goal: I plan to practise three times a week for the next ten weeks. And if I work 
with a partner, I think I will be more successful, because my partner can give me tips, 
suggestions, and encouragement. I can also talk with my partner about my plan and 
consider whether I need to change anything I am doing. I don't have a goal to complete 
the race in any set time. Finishing the race will be my goal. I will definitely be more fit 
and I will be really proud of myself if I can do this." 


A3. Safety 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others 
(e.g., following appropriate procedures and guidelines; demonstrating social responsibility; encour¬ 
aging others to act safely; wearing sunscreen, long sleeves, sunglasses, and a hat to limit UV exposure) 
in a variety of physical activity settings (e.g., school, community recreational facilities, outdoor 
recreational venues) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: "Other than school facilities, what are some local indoor and outdoor 
recreational venues in our community that we can use for physical activities? What safety 
considerations do you need to think about, whether you are participating in physical 
activity at school or in the community?" 


208 









Student: "We have several parks, including a skateboard park, as well as fields, hiking 
and snow trails, bike paths, a rink, and a lake that is close by. Wherever we participate 
in physical activities, we need to be aware of ourselves and others in our surroundings. 
Different activities have specific safety considerations and rules that we need to think 
about and follow. We also need to use and wear the proper safety equipment for these 
activities. Using good judgement, thinking for yourself, following posted rules and 
signs, and thinking before you act are good general guidelines." 


A3.2 demonstrate a basic understanding of how to deal with emergency situations that may occur 
while participating in physical activity (e.g., remain calm, know when more help is needed or when 
to call 9-1-1, know where to get more help, know how to recognize symptoms of asthma or anaphylaxis, 
move objects that may be a safety hazard away from the injured person, know what an automated ex¬ 
ternal defibrillator (AED) is and be aware of where they are located in community facilities) [PS, CT] 


o 

73 

> 

D 

m 

oo 


209 


ACTIVE LIVING 





THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE 
SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND 
STRATEGIES 


00 

Ul 


SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS 


B1. Movement Skills and Concepts 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

B1.1 perform smooth transfers of weight and rotations, in relation to others and equipment, in a 
variety of situations involving static and dynamic balance (e.g., display control while stepping 
and turning on and off steps during an aerobic routine; move smoothly between positions and twists 
during a Pilates activity; work with a partner to create a sequence that involves holding a partner's 
partial or whole weight when transferring from one balance to another) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: "Create a series of tableaux that demonstrates the different phases of 
your favourite physical activity, such as the three phases involved in sprinting or in 
swinging a cricket bat, showing how you get ready, showing the action itself, and 
showing the follow-through. Be sure to show three distinct movements and a smooth 
transition from each movement to the next." 


B1.2 perform a wide variety of locomotor movements, with and without equipment, while re¬ 
sponding to a variety of external stimuli (e.g., approach, take off, and land when doing a triple 
jump into a pit; strive to beat a time record in orienteering; choreograph a dance sequence in response 
to music; perform step aerobics at different tempos; change styles of cross-country skiing depending on 
snow and terrain conditions, using a skate technique on open, flat sections and a classic technique on 
narrower trails) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: "How might you modify the movements in your dance sequence as 
the music changes or as you develop new movement sequences using different types 
of music?" 

Student: "With slower, more lyrical music, my movements would be slower and bigger. 
With fast music, I would use quicker and stronger steps in response to the fast tempo." 


B1.3 use and combine sending, receiving, and retaining skills in response to a variety of external 
stimuli, while applying basic principles of movement’ 1 ' (e.g., shift weight and use all joints for 
maximum force when throwing against the wind; put an appropriate spin on the ball when throwing 



OVERALL EXPECTATIONS 

By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating an understanding of the basic requirements of the skills 
and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities; 

B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components 
of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in 
those activities. 


* See page 31 for background information and a description of movement principles. 


210 












a football or rolling a ball around an obstacle in front of a target; sprint to catch a pass that has been 
thrown short to an open space away from defenders; while moving to music, transfer a rhythmic gym¬ 
nastics ball from one hand to the other, using the momentum of the movement to hold on to the ball; 
show azvareness of others' positions when taking off and landing in a basketball layup; move body to 
retain an object in flag tag while evading defenders; keep the basketball on their lap while moving and 
evading a defender in wheelchair basketball) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: "How will you adjust for the wind when throwing an object?" 

Student: "I will need to throw harder or softer, or adjust my aim, depending on the 
direction of the wind." 


B1.4 demonstrate an understanding of the phases of movement (i.e., preparation, execution, 

follow-through) and apply this understanding to the refinement of movement skills in a var¬ 
iety of physical activities (e.g., assume a ready position, swing, and follow through in a badminton 
stroke; reach, pull, and recover when doing the back crawl) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: "How does the preparation phase for sprinting differ from the prepara¬ 
tion phase for cross-country running?" 

Student: "With sprinting, you stay low to the ground and prepare to explode from the 
start. With cross-country running, you want to start in more of an upright position, and 
you start more slowly because you want to conserve energy and pace yourself all the way 
through the run." 


B2. Movement Strategies 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 


o 

73 

> 

D 

m 

oo 


B2.1 demonstrate an understanding of the components of a range of physical activities (e.g., move¬ 
ment skills, game structures, basic rules and guidelines, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and 
apply this understanding as they participate in a variety of physical activities in indoor and 
outdoor environments [IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: "Working in your small group, consider what rule you could change in 
this activity to make it more or less challenging." 

Student: "When playing ultimate disc, we could change the rules so that everyone has to 
throw with their non-dominant hand. That gives everyone good practice and also makes 
the play a little more equal because it makes it challenging for everyone." 


Teacher prompt: "Now change the activity again, considering how you might adapt the 
activity for a person in your group who has different needs; for example, you may adapt 
the activity for someone who doesn't understand the language or someone who may not 
understand the rules of the activity." 

Student: "We might change the rules to make it a lot simpler - for example, we would not 
worry about the rules about the number of seconds you can hold the disc or the number 
of steps you are allowed to take with the disc. Once everyone seems to understand the 
game, we could add those rules back in. Or we might play the game with a person who 
needs help paired up with a more experienced player, or with everyone working in pairs, 
so people can help each other follow the game. In this variation, both players would han¬ 
dle the disc - for example, one catches it and the other throws it - before it goes on to 
another pair." 


211 


MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES 









THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


00 

LU 

D 

< 

cc 

u 


B2.2 demonstrate an understanding of how movement skills, concepts, and strategies are transfer¬ 
able across different physical activities within various categories* (e.g., individual, target, net/ 
wall, striking/fielding, territory), and identify skills, concepts, and strategies that they found 
effective while participating in a variety of physical activities in different categories [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "Think about activities you do at school and those you do on your own 
time. How can knowing how to do an activity well affect your performance in that activity 
and in other activities?" 

Students: "At school, we did cross-country running. I also go running sometimes at 
home. Learning how to pace myself when I run has made it a lot easier for me to run in 
my neighbourhood." "We worked on our stability and balance when we did fitness and 
developmental gymnastics at school. My balance has improved and that has helped me 
with trail riding when I am working on strategies for riding over logs and bumps. The 
better I get, the more confident I get and the more I am able to do. I can also use the skills, 
like balance, and the strategies, like ways of negotiating bumps and jumps, when I do 
other activities, like skateboarding." 


Teacher prompt: "What are some common elements of a variety of individual activities, 
such as yoga, qigong, and track and field? What about common elements among team 
sports such as soccer, rugby, and softball?" 

Student: "Activities like yoga and qigong involve core strength, balance, and flexibility. 
Paying attention to breathing is also really important. There is also a certain etiquette that 
you should follow in these activities - for example, you shouldn't talk while doing the 
activity. You should focus on your own practice. In team activities like soccer, rugby, and 
softball, you use sending, receiving, and carrying skills. You need an understanding of 
the basic rules. You need to be aware of the boundaries and work together as a team." 


B2.3 apply a variety of tactical solutions to increase chances of success as they participate in 
physical activities (e.g., individual activities: use conscious breathing to enhance movement 
during a fitness activity; toss balls or beanbags in an even pattern and keep eyes focused at the peak 
of the toss when learning to juggle with three objects; target activities: position balls or rocks in 
a place that makes it difficult for the opposing team to score in games such as bocce or curling; net/ 
wall activities: choose the type of shot and consider the placement of the shot to gain an offensive 
advantage; striking/fielding activities: send the object away from the defenders to allow for more 
time to score before the fielders retrieve the object; territory activities: send a pass that places the 
object closer to the goal; keep their body between the object and the defender while moving; practise 
using a fast transition from offence to defence) [IS, CT]** 


* See pages 32-34 for background information and a description of various categories of physical activities. 

** The types of living skills associated with students' application of tactical solutions differ with the students' developmental 
stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At 
the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater 
or lesser degree. In Grades 1-3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills; in Grades 4-6, most students are 
ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions; and in Grades 7 and 8, most are prepared to focus their 
energy on the thinking skills involved (e.g., working as a team to choose tactics that will result in the greatest success, adjusting play 
in response to an opponent's actions or conditions in the environment). 


212 








Teacher prompt: "How do you use a breathing rhythm, planning when to inhale 
and when to exhale, to help you when doing activities such as push-ups, curl-ups, 
and stretches?" 

Student: "I find it easier to do curl-ups when I concentrate on breathing in when I'm 
lying back and on breathing out when I'm sitting up." 


Teacher prompt: "What are some important ideas that transfer across different types 
of activities done in the natural environment, such as canoeing, hiking, and skiing?" 

Student: "When taking part in any activity in the natural environment, you should 
always respect the environment and everything that lives in it. Your activities should not 
harm or significantly change the environment. You should also take steps to ensure your 
safety. Monitor the weather conditions, have an emergency action plan, and always make 
sure others know where you will be and when you will return." 


o 

73 

> 

D 

m 

oo 


213 


MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES 





THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


C. HEALTHY LIVING 


00 

UJ 


LL. 

u 


Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 8: Key Topics* 

Topic 

Cl. Understanding 
Health Concepts 

C2. Making 
Healthy Choices 

C3. Making Connections 
for Healthy Living 

Healthy Eating 

C1.1 Nutrients 

C2.1 Food choices - criteria 
[CT] 

C3.1 Promoting healthy 
eating [CT] 

Personal Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 

Cl.2 Reducing risk of injuries, 
death [PS, CT] 

C2.2 Assessing situations for 
potential danger [CT] 

C3.2 Impact of violent 
behaviours; supports [CT] 

Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

Cl.3 Warning signs, 
consequences 

C2.3 Mental health, stress 
management [PS] 


Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl .4 Decisions about sexual 
activity; supports [PS] 

Cl .5 Gender identity, sexual 
orientation, self-concept [PS] 

C2.4 Decision making, 
contraception [IS, CT] 

C3.3 Relationships and 
intimacy [IS, CT] 


* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1-8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 224-225. The topics 
are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand. 


OVERALL EXPECTATIONS 

By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

Cl. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development; 

C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions 
and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being; 

C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being - how their 
choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around 
them affect their own and others' health and well-being. 


SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS 


Cl. Understanding Health Concepts 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

Healthy Eating 

Cl .1 demonstrate an understanding of different types of nutrients (e.g., macronutrients and micro¬ 
nutrients) and their functions 


214 






















Teacher prompt: "Different kinds of nutrients are needed to achieve optimal health and 
prevent disease. Nutrients can be divided into two types - macronutrients and micro¬ 
nutrients. What are these, and why is each kind of nutrient needed for good health?" 

Student: "Macro means big. Macronutrients include carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. 
They provide our bodies with energy for growth and activity. Micro means small. 
Micronutrients are the vitamins and minerals in our food. They help regulate body 
functions such as vision, healing, and muscle movement." 


Personal Safety and Injury Prevention 

Cl .2 identify situations that could lead to injury or death (e.g., head injuries or concussions in contact 
sports; spinal cord injuries from falls or diving into unknown water; injuries in car accidents; mental, 
physical, emotional, or social harm resulting from mental health and/or addiction problems), and de¬ 
scribe behaviours that can help to reduce risk (e.g., wearing protective gear, especially helmets; 
thinking before acting; avoiding conflicts that could lead to violence; avoiding diving into unknown 
water; being cautious when driving or riding ATVs, tractors, boats, or snowmobiles; being aware of 
food safety when cooking and preparing food; using self-acceptance, coping, and help-seeking skills) 
[PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: "Unintentional injury is a leading cause of death for children and youth in 
Canada. Adolescents need to be aware of the potential results associated with higher-risk 
activities. What are some possible consequences of injuries to the spinal cord or head?" 

Student: "Spinal cord injuries can cause complete or partial paralysis. Severe head 
injuries can cause brain damage that may result in impairments of movement, sight, 
hearing, speech, cognitive functioning, or sensation or that may even lead to death." 


o 

73 

> 

D 

m 

oo 


Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours 

Cl .3 identify and describe the warning signs of substance misuse or abuse, addictions, and related 
behaviours (e.g., changes in behaviour, gradual withdrawal from social circles, a drop in academic 
performance) and the consequences that can occur (e.g., aggressive behaviours related to alcohol use 
that can lead to gender-based violence, dating violence, or sexual assault; financial problems resulting 
from online gambling; overdose as a result of misuse of prescription medications, including pain relievers; 
inability to make good decisions as a result of drug use; binge drinking and alcohol poisoning; injury, 
death, or legal charges resulting from accidents caused by impaired driving; self-harming behaviours 
related to mental illnesses such as depression that are exacerbated by substance abuse; fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder [FASD] in children as a residt of alcohol abuse by the mother during pregnancy) 


Human Development and Sexual Health 

Cl .4 identify and explain factors that can affect an individual's decisions about sexual activity 

(e.g., previous thinking about reasons to wait, including making a choice to delay sexual activity and 
establishing personal limits; perceived personal readiness; peer pressure; desire; curiosity; self-concept; 
awareness and acceptance of gender identity and sexual orientation; physical or cognitive disabilities 
and possible associated assumptions; legal concerns; awareness of health risks, including riskofSTIs 
and blood-borne infections; concerns about risk of pregnancy; use of alcohol or drugs; personal or family 
values; religious beliefs; cultural teachings; access to information; media messages), and identify 
sources of support regarding sexual health (e.g., a health professional [doctor, nurse, public 
health practitioner], a community elder, a teacher, a religious leader, a parent or other trusted adult, 
a reputable website) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: "How would thinking about your personal limits and making a personal 
plan influence decisions you may choose to make about sexual activity?" 


215 


HEALTHY LIVING 







THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


00 

LU 

D 

< 

cc 

u 


Student: "Thinking in advance about what I value and what my personal limits are 
would help me to respond and make decisions that I felt comfortable with in different 
situations. I would be able to approach a situation with more confidence and stick to 
what I had planned. I would be less likely to be caught off guard and have to react 
without having thought through the options and possible consequences." 


Teacher prompt: "Why is it important to get information from a credible source before 
making a decision about being sexually active? Why is this important for all students - 
including those with physical or cognitive disabilities?" 

Students: "Having more information - and information that you can trust - helps you 
make better decisions for yourself. Taking time to get more information also gives you 
more time to think. Teens who consult a health professional before being sexually active 
are more likely to use protection, such as condoms, if they choose to be sexually active." 
"Teens with physical or cognitive disabilities still need information about sexual health, 
just like everybody else. They may be dealing with different issues, like adapting sexual 
health information to their particular needs, or with variations on the same issues, like 
privacy and self-image." 


Cl .5 demonstrate an understanding of gender identity (e.g., male, female, two-spirited, transgender, 
transsexual, intersex), gender expression, and sexual orientation (e.g., heterosexual, gay, lesbian, 
bisexual), and identify factors that can help individuals of all identities and orientations 
develop a positive self-concept [PS] 

Teacher prompt: "Gender identity refers to a person's internal sense or feeling of being male 
or female, which may or may not be the same as the person's biological sex. ft is different 
from and does not determine a person's sexual orientation. Sexual orientation refers to a 
person's sense of affection and sexual attraction for people of the same sex, the opposite 
sex, or both sexes. Gender expression refers to how you demonstrate your gender (based 
on traditional gender roles) through the ways you act, dress, and behave. Gender identity, 
gender expression, and sexual orientation are connected to the way you see yourself and 
to your interactions with others. Understanding and accepting your gender identity and 
your sexual orientation can have a strong impact on the development of your self-concept. 
A person's self-concept can develop positively if the person understands and accepts their 
gender identity and sexual orientation and is accepted by family and community. It is 
harder to develop a positive self-concept, however, if the way a person feels or identifies 
does not meet perceived or real societal norms and expectations or is not what they want, 
or if they do not feel supported by their family, friends, school, or community. A person's 
self-concept can be harmed if a person is questioning their gender identity or sexual 
orientation and does not have support in dealing with their feelings of uncertainty. What 
kind of support do people need to help them understand and accept their gender identity 
and sexual orientation?" 

Student: "Having role models that you can relate to - for example, people of similar ages 
or cultures - is important. So is having all gender identities and sexual orientations por¬ 
trayed positively in the media, in literature, and in materials we use at school. Family, 
school, and community support are crucial. Additional help can come from trusted adults, 
community organizations, and school support groups such as gay-straight alliances." 


216 







C2. Making Healthy Choices 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

Healthy Eating 

C2.1 evaluate personal food choices on the basis of a variety of criteria, including serving size, 
nutrient content, energy value, and ingredients (e.g.,fats, carbohydrates, protein, vitamins and 
minerals, calories, additives, allergens), preparation method, and other factors that can affect 
health and well-being [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Why is paying attention to nutrients more valuable than counting 
calories?" 

Student: "Paying attention to nutrients helps you focus on eating in a balanced way. 
Calories are only one thing to consider and, by themselves, don't provide information 
about nutrition. By following Canada's Food Guide, I can make sure that I am meeting 
my energy and nutrient needs. It's important to get all of the different nutrients that my 
body needs. By considering nutrient content, I can make sure I get enough vitamins and 
minerals - for example, I need to eat orange vegetables like carrots and orange peppers to 
get Vitamin A. And if I make soup with milk instead of water. I'll get more calcium and 
Vitamin D." 

Teacher: "Serving size is one thing to consider when making food choices. How many 
servings of fruits and vegetables are recommended for teenagers?" 

Student: "Canada's Food Guide recommends that teens eat seven to eight servings of 
vegetables and fruit per day." 


o 

73 

> 

D 

m 

oo 


Teacher prompt: "If you do not eat breakfast, how does that affect how you feel during 
the day?" 

Student: "I feel sluggish in the morning, and I'm starving by ten o'clock. When I'm so 
hungry. I'm more likely to eat less nutritious food at break." 


Personal Safety and Injury Prevention 

C2.2 demonstrate the ability to assess situations for potential dangers (e.g., getting into a car with 
a stranger or an impaired, unlicensed, or inexperienced driver; dependencies or coercion in dating 
relationships; joining gangs; participating in violence; attending a party where alcohol or drugs are 
being used; using cosmetic procedures or treatments such as piercing, tattooing, crash diets, or tanning 
that involve potential health risks; exposure to infectious diseases through direct contact, sneezing, or 
coughing), and apply strategies for avoiding dangerous situations [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "What are some things you could do instead of getting into a car with a 
driver who has been drinking?" 

Student: "I could call a family member or friend, stay over where I am, walk home with a 
friend if there is a safe route, or take a bus or taxi if one is available. I should have a plan 
and, if I can, carry money or a phone, so that I do not have to depend on someone else to 
get home safely." 


Teacher prompt: "What are some things to be aware of in a relationship to keep yourself 
and your partner safe?" 


217 


HEALTHY LIVING 









THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


00 

LU 

D 

< 

cc 

u 


Student: "Thinking about what makes a relationship healthier is a good start. Things 
that could lead to danger in relationships include an uneven balance of power in the rela¬ 
tionship and situations that involve alcohol or drugs. I can stay safer by defining my own 
limits, listening to my gut feelings, and letting others know what I am doing and where I 
am going. If something does not feel good or right, I need to have the confidence to tell the 
other person to stop immediately. And if someone tells me - verbally or non-verbally - to 
stop, I need to stop immediately." 


Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours 

C2.3 explain how stress affects mental health and emotional well-being, and demonstrate an 

understanding of how to use a variety of strategies for relieving stress and caring for their 
mental health (e.g., engaging in physical activity, listening to music, resting, meditating, talking 
with a trusted individual, practising smudging) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: "Maintaining mental health and emotional well-being involves balancing 
the different aspects of life: the physical, intellectual, social, emotional, and spiritual. It 
involves the ability to think, feel, act, and interact in a way that allows you to enjoy life 
and cope with challenges that arise. Signs of potential mental health difficulties can include 
being frequently sad or depressed, anxious, or rebellious; having difficulty paying atten¬ 
tion; having problems with eating, sleeping, or getting along at school; or being addicted 
to substances. Everyone is vulnerable to emotional or mental stresses. What can you do 
to take care of your mental health?" 

Student: "Being aware of my feelings and monitoring them can help. So can understand¬ 
ing that anyone can experience mental health difficulties and that getting help makes a 
big difference." 


Teacher prompt: "Stress can be positive and negative. Stress can motivate you to get 
things done, but it is also connected to things over which you have less control, like ill¬ 
ness, death, or divorce, financial concerns, or environmental issues. Identify a situation 
in which students often feel stressed. How can you manage stress effectively?" 

Student: "Students often feel stressed when they have too much to do. To cope, you need 
to plan your time and set priorities. Do the most important things first. Include some 
time for taking breaks and being active. Check off what you get done as you do it. Plan 
with a friend, if that helps you. Stress can be managed or relieved in many ways. Some 
people find that taking some personal time to reflect and think and do quiet things like 
rest, write, read, meditate, or listen to music works best for them. Others find that being 
physically active or interacting with others by talking through problems is helpful. 
Different things work for different people, and you have to find the way that works best 
for you. Some cultures have special ways of relieving stress. Some First Nation people, 
for example, use smudging to relieve stress. This is a practice in which people fan smoke 
from herbs like sage or sweetgrass over their bodies to cleanse them of bad feelings and 
get rid of negative thoughts and energy. Afterwards, they feel renewed, physically, emo¬ 
tionally, mentally, and spiritually." 


Human Development and Sexual Health 

C2.4 demonstrate an understanding of aspects of sexual health and safety, including contraception 
and condom use for pregnancy and STI prevention, the concept of consent, and matters 
they need to consider and skills they need to use in order to make safe and healthy decisions 
about sexual activity (e.g., self-knozvledge; abstinence; delaying first intercourse; establishing, dis¬ 
cussing, and respecting boundaries; showing respect; need for additional information and support; 
safer sex and pleasure; communication, assertiveness, and refusal skills) [IS, CT] 


218 








Teacher prompt: "What do teenagers need to know about contraception and safer sex in 
order to protect their sexual health and set appropriate personal limits?" 

Student: "Teenagers need to know about the benefits and risks of different types of 
contraception. They need to understand that the only 100 per cent sure way of not 
becoming pregnant or getting an STI, including HIV, is not having sexual contact. 

Those who choose to be sexually active also need to know which contraceptive methods 
provide a protective barrier against disease as well as pregnancy. Condoms provide 
protection against both pregnancy and STIs - but to be effective, they need to be used 
properly and used every time. Teenagers need to understand how important it is to talk 
with their partners about sexual health choices, consent, and keeping safe. They have to 
develop the skills to communicate their thoughts effectively, listen respectfully, and 
read body cues in these conversations. This takes practice." 


C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living 


By the end of Grade 8, students will: 

Healthy Eating 

C3.1 identify strategies for promoting healthy eating within the school, home, and community 

(e.g., implementing school healthy food policies, launching healthy-eating campaigns, choosing healthy 
food items to sell in fundraising campaigns, getting involved in family meal planning, learning food 
preparation skills, urging local restaurants to highlight healthy food choices) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "How could you promote healthy eating at home?" 


o 

73 

> 

D 

m 

oo 


Student: "I could help with meal planning, shopping, and preparation, or discuss healthy 
eating with my family." 


Teacher: "Where can you get more information about healthy eating in your 
community?" 


Student: "The public health unit, registered dieticians, medical clinics, family health cen¬ 
tres, and reputable websites are all good sources of information about healthy eating." 


Teacher: "What might you do to promote healthy eating at school?" 

Student: "I could ask about healthy food policies and join clubs or groups to support 
healthy eating at school. I could model healthy eating. As a class, we could put together 
information about healthier food choices to share with younger students. Instead of sell¬ 
ing chocolates to raise funds, we could do something healthy like have a dance-a-thon." 


Personal Safety and Injury Prevention 

C3.2 analyse the impact of violent behaviours, including aggression, anger, swarming, dating 
violence, and gender-based or racially based violence, on the person being targeted, the 
perpetrator, and bystanders, and describe the role of support services in preventing violence 
(e.g., help lines, school counsellors, social workers, youth programs, shelters, restorative justice pro¬ 
grams, gay-straight student alliances) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: "Managing emotions in heated situations is an essential skill. Consider 
this situation: Students are playing basketball on the playground; someone gets pushed 
aggressively and tempers flare. What is the impact on those playing and those watching?" 

Student: "This situation could escalate into a fight. Someone could be hurt, and that could 
lead to suspension or assault charges and damage the relationships between the players on 
and off the court and in the classroom. It could scare or injure the people watching." 


219 


HEALTHY LIVING 








THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


00 

LU 

D 

< 

cc 

u 


Teacher prompt: “Gender-based violence includes any form of behaviour - psychological, 
physical, and sexual - that is based on an individual's gender and is intended to control, 
humiliate, or harm the individual. When we say 'gender-based violence', we are often 
referring to violence against women and girls. Can you give me some examples?" 

Student: “It can include physical assault in a relationship, sexual assault, or rape. It can 
also include things like having your rear end pinched in the hallway, having your top 
pulled down or lifted up, or being held down and touched." 


Human Development and Sexual Health 

C3.3 analyse the attractions and benefits associated with being in a relationship (e.g., support, 

understanding, camaraderie, pleasure), as well as the benefits, risks, and drawbacks, for them¬ 
selves and others, of relationships involving different degrees of sexual intimacy (e.g., hurt 
when relationships end or trust is broken; in more sexually intimate relationships, risk ofSTIs and 
related risk to future fertility, unintended pregnancy, sexual harassment and exploitation; potential 
for dating violence) [IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “There are pros and cons to being in a relationship, and when you are in 
a relationship, there are positive things and drawbacks associated with different levels of 
intimacy. All of them are important to think about. There is a range of intimate behaviours 
that people can use to show caring and connection in a relationship, and different levels of 
risk associated with different levels of intimacy. Intimate behaviours can include holding 
hands, hugging, kissing, touching bodies and genitals, and engaging in sexual intercourse. 
When considering the level of intimacy that is appropriate for their relationship, what does 
a couple need to think about?" 

Student: "Both individuals need to consider their own values and beliefs and treat each 
other's choices and limits with respect. If one partner chooses to abstain from a sexual 
activity - for example, a person might want to kiss but not want to have any genital 
contact - the other partner needs to respect that decision. Both partners need to have 
the confidence and comfort level to talk about how they can show their affection while 
respecting each other's decisions." 

Teacher: "Being intimate with someone includes having a good understanding of the 
concept of consent. What are some of the important things that we need to understand 
about consent?" 

Student: “Consent to one activity doesn't imply consent to all sexual activity. It is import¬ 
ant to ask for consent at every stage. Consent is communicated, not assumed. You can ask 
your partner simple questions to be sure that they want to continue: 'Do you want to do 
this?' or 'Do you want to stop?' A 'no' at any stage does not need any further explanation." 

Teacher: "How can being in an intimate relationship affect other relationships in 
your life?" 

Student: "When you have a boyfriend or a girlfriend, sometimes friends treat you differ¬ 
ently. You might start hanging out with different people or spending less time with some 
friends. You might have less time to spend with family. It's important to be aware of what 
is happening, so that you can take steps to avoid neglecting other relationships that are 
important to you." 


220 






APPENDIX 
Learning Summaries 
by Strand 


The charts on the following pages provide a summary of the key topics and/or skills, 
concepts, and strategies covered by the expectations in each strand from Grade 1 to 
Grade 8. The focus of each expectation is conveyed in just a few words, in order to give 
teachers a quick overview of the strand across all grades. 

In a number of cases, indicated in the charts by means of shaded arrows, the topic of an 
expectation remains essentially the same across several grades. In these cases, grade-to- 
grade variations in content are summarized in brief additional phrases. For example, the 
summary description in the Movement Competence chart for expectation B1.2 reads 
"jumping, hopping, and landing - maintaining control, landing safely, using different 
body actions, jumping for distance/height and from low heights". Although the focus 
of the expectation from Grade 2 to Grade 5 remains the same (jumping, hopping, and 
landing), students in Grade 2 are expected to jump, hop, and land in control; students 
in Grade 3 learn to jump for distance and height; students in Grade 4 are focusing on 
landing in control when jumping from a low height; and students in Grade 5 are jumping 
for height and distance using a variety of body actions. In order to understand when 
specific requirements are introduced, readers must consult the expectations, examples, 
and teacher prompts in the body of the curriculum document. There, they will find 
indications of the specific, age-appropriate content, scope, and depth of coverage of 
the expectations in particular grades. 

Some of the boxes, or cells, in the charts are shaded. Depending on the organizing principle 
of the chart, a shaded box may indicate that a particular expectation is not included in a 
given grade, or that there is a shift in topic in an expectation from one grade to the next, 
or that the topic is not considered from a particular perspective in a given grade (e.g., in 
Grade 1 in the Flealthy Living chart, the topic Flealthy Eating is considered from the per¬ 
spective of "Understanding Flealth Concepts" and "Making Healthy Choices", but not 
from the perspective of "Making Connections for Healthy Living", so the cell in the last 
column is shaded). 





NJ 

NJ 

NJ 


ACTIVE LIVING LEARNING SUMMARY: KEYTOPICS* 


A1. Active Participation 


A2. Physical Fitness 


A3. Safety 


1.1 Participation 
in program activities, 
behaviours showing 
readiness[PS, IS] 


A 1.2 Enjoyment of 
activity (individual and 
small-group activities) 
[PS] 

A1.3 Ways of being 
active [CT] 

A2.1 Daily physical 
activity (DPA) - sus¬ 
tained, moderate to 
vigorous activity, 

20 minutes per day, 

A2.2 Health benefits 
of being physically 
active [CT] 

A2.3 Physical signs of 
exertion [CT] 


A3.1 Behaviours 
and procedures that 
maximize safety of self 
and others [PS, IS] 

A3.2 Environmental 
safety risks [PS,CT] 



A 1.3 Reasons for 
participating in physi¬ 
cal activity [CT] 

including warm-up and 
cool-down [PS] 

A2.2 Activities to 
improve heart and lung 
health 

A2.3 Exertion, 
self-assessment 
[PS,CT] 

A2.4 Personal and 
group goal setting 
related to physical 
activity [PS, IS,CT] 



A3.2 Safety 
precautions for selves 
and others, including 
those with medical 
conditions [PS,CT] 



A1.3 Benefits of par¬ 
ticipating in physical 
activity [CT] 



A2.2 Benefits of 
improved cardiorespi¬ 
ratory fitness [CT] 



A2.4 Developing 
and acting on personal 
physical activity goals 
[PS,CT] 



A3.2 Responding to 
accidents and injuries 
[PS,CT] 

A1.2 Enjoyment of 
activity (individual, 
small-group,and lead- 
up activities) [PS] 

A 1.3 Factors that 
motivate or challenge 
participation (in and 
outside of school) [CT] 



A2.2 Physical activity 
and health-related 
fitness [CT] 

A2.3 Exertion, 
self-assessment, in¬ 
trinsic, extrinsic factors 
[PS, CT] 




A3.2 Prevention of 
accidents and injuries 
[PS,CT] 








A2.3 Assessment 
and monitoring of 
health-related fitness 
[PS, CT] 

A2.4 Developing and 
implementing personal 
fitness plans[PS,CT] 



A3.2 Minimizing 
environmental health 
risks [PS, CT] 













A3.2 Treating 
minor injuries 
[PS, CT] 

A1.2 Enjoyment 
of activity (diverse 
indoor/outdoor 
activities) [PS] 





A2.2 Factors 
affecting fitness; 
application of training 
principles [CT] 



A2.4 Developing a 
fitness plan to meet a 
fitness goal [PS,CT] 



A3.2 Procedures 
for anticipating and 
responding to outdoor 
hazards[PS,CT] 



A1.3 Application 
of motivating factors, 
influencing others [CT] 



A2.2 Health-related 
and skill-related com¬ 
ponents of fitness; use 
of training principles to 
enhance fitness[CT] 






A3.2 Responding to 
emergency situations 
[PS, CT] 


f See page 221 for important information about the content, purpose, and design of this chart. 


Gradel Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6 













































































MOVEMENT COMPETENCE LEARNING SUMMARY: SKILLS,CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES 


B1. Movement Skills and Concepts** 


Stability 


B1.1 Static 
balance-using 
different body 
parts, levels, 
shapes, working 
with eguipment 
and others, making 
El transitions [PS] 
|J • Concepts: body 
and space, later 
expanding to in¬ 
clude relationship 


B1.1 Static & 
dynamic balance- 
weight transfers, 
changing speed, 
levels, with/with¬ 
out equipment, 
alone/with others 
[PS,IS] 

• Concepts: all, 
progressing to a 
focus on effort 
and relationship 


B1.1 Static & 
dynamic balance 
-weight transfers, 
rotations, with 
others and equip¬ 
ment [PS, IS] 

• Concepts: 
all, with focus 
on effort and 
relationship 


B1.2 Jumping, 
hopping,and 
landing — 
maintaining 
control, landing 
safely, using 
different body 
actions,jumping 
for distance/ 
height and from 
low heights [PS] 

• Concepts: body, 
later expanding to 
include effort and 
relationship 


Locomotion 


B1.2 Moving and 
stopping safely, in control, 
with awareness of others 
and equipment [PS] 

• Concepts: body, space, 
relationship 


B1.2 Movement 
combinations-wide 
variety, with/without 
equipment, alone/with 
others, using different 
speeds, pathways, 
directions, levels [PS, IS] 

• Concepfs:all, progress¬ 
ing from body to space to 
effort to relationship 


B1.2 Movement 
combinations-with/ 
without equipment, in 
response to external 
stimuli [PS] 

• Concepts: space, effort 
and relationship 


B1.3 Moving in 
different directions, using 
different body parts [PS] 

• Concepts: body, space 


B1.3 Moving in different 
directions, using different 
speeds, pathways, levels, 
with/without equipment, 
alone/with others [PS, IS] 

• Concepts: body, 
progressing to space, then 
effort,then relationship 


B1.3 Movement combi¬ 
nations-with/without 
equipment, alone/with 
others, using different 
speeds,pathways,direc¬ 
tions, levels [PS,IS] 
•Concepts: all, progressing 
from body to space to 
effort to relationship 


B1.3 Sending and 
receiving - different 
shapes/sizes, using 
different levels, speeds, 
distances, body parts/ 
equipment [PS, IS] 

• Concepts: focus on 
space,effort,relationship, 
movement principles 


B1.3 Sending, receiving, 
and retaining-in relation 
to others, in response to 
external stimuli [PS, IS] 

• Concepts: focus on 
effort, relationship 
movement principles 


Manipulation 

B1.4 Sending 
objects - using 
different shapes/sizes, 
levels, body parts [PS] 

• Concepts; body, space, 
building to include 
relationship 


B1.4 Sending and 
receiving - using 
different shapes/sizes, 
levels, speeds, distances, 
body parts/ equipment 
[PS,IS] 

• Concepts: all 
movement concepts 


B1.4 Sending and 
receiving - using 
different shapes/sizes, 
levels, speeds, body 
parts/ equipment 
[PS,IS] 

• Concepts: all 
movement concepts, 
movement principles 


B1.4 Retaining 
objects - using 
different shapes/ sizes, 
body parts, equipment 
[PS, IS] 

• Concepts: focus 
on space, effort, 
relationship 


B1.4 Phases of 
movement [PS] 


B1.5 Receiving 
objects-using 
different shapes/ 
sizes, levels, body 
parts [PS,IS] 

• Concepts: body, 
space 


B1.5 Retaining 
objects - using 
different shapes/ 
sizes, body parts, 
equipment [PS, IS] 
• Concepts: body, 
progressing 
to space,then 
awareness,then 
relationship 



B2.1 Activity 
components- 
variety of lead-up, 
recreational,fitness, 
and dance activities 
[IS,CT] 


B2.1 Activity 
components - 
variety of lead-up, 
recreational,fitness, 
and dance activities 
in diverse indoor/ 
outdoor environ¬ 
ments [IS,CT] 


B2.2 Categories 
of games and 
activities - common 
features and strate¬ 
gies [CT] 


B2.2 Categories of 
games and activities 
- connection bet¬ 
ween skills, concepts, 
strategies [CT] 


B2.3 Tactical 
solutions to 
increase 
success in 
activities 
[IS, CT] 


NJ 

K) 

UJ 


* See page 22T for important information about the content, purpose, and design of this chart. 

** The movement skilis are stability, locomotion, and manipulation. The movement concepts are body, space, effort, and relationship. See detailed information on pages 28-30. The chart is 
organized by skill category and grade. Movement concepts are outlined in the body of the chart as they relate to the development of each skill category. 


Gradel Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6 































































HEALTHY LIVING LEARNING SUMMARY: KEYTOPICS* 



Topic 

Cl. Understanding 

Health Concepts 

C2. Making Healthy 
Choices 

C3. Making Connections 
for Healthy Living 


Healthy Eating 

C1.1 Food for healthy bodies 

C2.1 Food groups, Canada's Food Guide [CT] 
C2.2 Hunger and thirst cues [PS] 



Personal 
Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 

Cl .2 Safe practices - personal safety [PS] 

C2.3 Caring and exploitive behaviours and 
feelings [IS] 

C2.4 Safety at school [PS] 

C3.1 Potential risks at home,in the 
community, outdoors [PS, CT] 

"O 

1 0 
i- 

Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 



C3.2 Unhealthy habits,healthy alternatives 
[PS] 


Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl.3 Body parts [PS] 

Cl.4 Senses and functions [PS] 

C2.5 Hygienic procedures [PS] 



Healthy Eating 


C2.1 Canada's Food Guide - healthy growth 

C2.2 Food choices (snacks, meals) [CT] 


fN 

a; 

Personal 
Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 

C1.1 Personal safety - home and 
outdoors [PS] 

Cl.2 Food allergies 

C2.3 Standing up for yourself [PS, IS] 

C3.1 Relating to others [IS] 


Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

Cl .3 Prescription/non-prescription 
medicines 


C3.2 Medication, healthy alternatives [CT] 


Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl.4 Stages of development [PS] 

C2.4 Oral health [PS] 



Healthy Eating 

Cl. 1 Food origins, nutritional value and 
environmental impact [CT] 

C2.1 Oral health,food choices [PS] 

C3.1 Local and cultural foods, eating 
choices [CT] 

Grade 3 

Personal 
Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 


C2.2 Safety guidelines outside of class [CT] 

C3.2 Real and fictional violence [IS] 

Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

C1.2 Impact of use of legal/iilegal 
substances 

C2.3 Decision making -substance use/ 
behaviours [CT] 



Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl.3 Healthy relationships [IS] 

Cl.4 Physical and emotional 
development [PS] 


C3.3 Visible, invisible differences,respect 
[PS,IS] 


Healthy Eating 

C1.1 Nutrients 

C2.1 Food choices,healthy-eating goals [CT] 

C3.1 Food choices in various settings [CT] 


Personal 

Cl.2 Safe use of technology [IS] 

C2.2 Decision making - assessing risk [CT] 



Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 

Cl.3 Bullying and abuse [IS] 




Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

Cl.4 Tobacco 

C2.3 Decisions about smoking [CT] 

C3.2 Short- and long-term effects of smoke 






Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl .5 Puberty - changes; emotional, social 
impact [PS] 

C2.4 Puberty - personal hygiene and care 
[PS] 



*See page 221 for important information about the content, purpose, and design of this chart. 


224 























Grade 8 Grade 7 Grade 6 Grade 5 


Cl. Understanding C2. Making Healthy C3. Making Connections 

Health Concepts Choices for Healthy Living 


Healthy Eating 


C2.1 Nutrition facts tables,food labels [CT] 

C3.1 Media influences - food choices [CT] 

Personal 
Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 

Cl. 1 Supports - injury prevention, emer¬ 
gencies, bullying, violence [PS] 

C2.2 Strategies - threats to personal safety 
[PS, IS, CT] 

C3.2 Actions,self-concept [PS, IS] 

Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

Cl .2 Short- and long-term effects of 
alcohol use 

C2.3 Refusal skills - alcohol use and other 
behaviours [IS] 

C3.3 Decision to drink alcohol, influences 
[CT] 

Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl .3 Reproductive system [PS] 

Cl .4 Menstruation,spermatogenesis 

C2.4 Emotional,interpersonal stresses - 
puberty [PS] 


Healthy Eating 


C2.1 influences on healthy eating [CT] 

C2.2 Eating cues and guidelines [PS] 

C3.1 Benefits of healthy eating/active 
living [CT] 

Personal 
Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 


C2.3 Safe and positive social interaction, 
conflict management [PS, IS] 

C3.2 Responsibilities, risks - care for self 
and others,safety practices [PS, IS] 

Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

C1.1 Effects of cannabis, illicit drugs 

Cl .2 Supports - substance use, addictive 
behaviours 

C2.4 Strategies, safe choices, influences, 
tobacco,alcohol,cannabis [CT] 


Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl .3 Development of self-concept [PS] 

C2.5 Understanding of puberty changes, 
healthy relationships [PS] 

C2.6 Decision making in relationships 
[IS, CT] 

C3.3 Stereotypes and assumptions — 

impacts and strategies for responding 
[PS,CT] 

Healthy Eating 


C2.1 Food choices and health problems [CT] 

C3.1 Healthy eating practices and routines 

Personal 
Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 

Cl .1 Benefits and dangers - technology 

C2.2 Impact- bullying/harassment [IS,CT] 


Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

Cl.2 Mental health,substances,support 
[PS] 

C2.3 Body image,substance use [PS,CT] 

C3.2 Implications of substance use and 
addictions [CT] 

Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl.3 Delaying sexual activity 

Cl .4 Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) 
Cl.5 STI and pregnancy prevention 

C2.4 Sexual health and decision making 
[PS] 

C3.3 Relationship changes at puberty 
[IS, CT] 

Healthy Eating 

C1.1 Nutrients 

C2.1 Food choices-criteria [CT] 

C3.1 Promoting healthy eating [CT] 

Personal 
Safety 
and Injury 
Prevention 

Cl.2 Reducing risk of injuries, death [PS, CT] 

C2.2 Assessing situations for potential 
danger[CT] 

C3.2 Impact of violent behaviours; 
supports [CT] 

Substance Use, 
Addictions, 
and Related 
Behaviours 

Cl.3 Warning signs, consequences 

C2.3 Mental health,stress management 
[PS] 


Human 
Development 
and Sexual 
Health 

Cl .4 Decisions about sexual activity; 
supports [PS] 

Cl .5 Gender identity, sexual orientation, 
self-concept [PS] 

C2.4 Decision making, contraception [IS,CT] 

C3.2 Relationships and intimacy [IS,CT] 


225 
























GLOSSARY 


The definitions provided in this glossary are specific to 
the curriculum context in which the terms are used. 

abstinence. A conscious decision to refrain from a 
behaviour or activity. This document uses the term 
in reference to abstinence from all forms of sexual 
intercourse and other sexual activities. 

abusive behaviour. Behaviour that is intended to 
intimidate, isolate, dominate, or control another 
person, which may be a single incident or a 
pattern of behaviour. Abusive behaviour includes 
physical abuse, sexual abuse and exploitation, 
neglect, emotional maltreatment, and exposure 
to domestic violence. 

active listening. A communication skill in which 
the listener focuses closely on the speaker's verbal 
and nonverbal messages and summarizes these 
messages to confirm understanding. 

active transportation. Any type of human- 
powered transportation - walking, cycling, 
skateboarding, wheeling a wheelchair, and so 
on - used to get oneself or others from one place 
to another. Active transportation may include 
a combination of methods, such as combining 
human-powered motion with public transportation. 

addiction. A physiological and psychological 
dependence on a substance or behaviour, such 
as alcohol or gambling. 

aerobic activity. A type of exercise that increases 
the body's demand for oxygen because of the 
continuous use of large muscles and a temporary 
increase in respiration and heart rate. Aerobic 
activity contributes to improving the efficiency 
of the heart, lungs, and circulatory system in 
using oxygen. 


agility. A skill-related component of physical 
fitness that relates to the ability to change the 
position of the body with speed and accuracy 
while moving from one point to another. 

See also skill-related fitness. 

allergies and sensitivities!intolerances. 

Types of reactions to foods and other substances 
or chemicals. Food allergies are caused by the 
body's immune system reacting inappropriately 
to particular proteins in a food, whereas food 
intolerances are usually related to the body's 
inability to digest particular foods. Some 
allergic reactions can be life-threatening. 

See also anaphylaxis. 

anaphylaxis. A serious allergic reaction that can 
be life-threatening. Food is the most common 
cause of anaphylaxis (most typically peanuts, 
tree nuts, seafood, and egg and milk products), 
but insect stings, medicine, latex, or exercise can 
also cause a reaction. (Adapted from Anaphylaxis 
Canada, "Anaphylaxis 101", www.anaphylaxis, 
ca/en/anaphylaxislOl/index.html [accessed 
January 27, 2015].) 

assault. The intentional direct or indirect 
application of force to another person, or the 
attempt or threat to do so. (Adapted from the 
Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c. C-46, s. 265 (1).) 

assisted reproductive technology. A term for a 
variety of methods used to achieve pregnancy by 
artificial or partially artificial means, such as 
embryo transfer and in vitro fertilization. 

automated external defibrillator (AED). 

A portable electronic device that an untrained 
person can use to check the heart rhythm of 




THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


another person. It recognizes rhythms that are not 
regular and uses voice prompts and messages to 
guide the rescuer to use the machine to provide 
a shock to the heart. The shock helps the heart to 
re-establish a regular rhythm. 

balance. A skill-related component of physical 
fitness that relates to the ability to maintain 
equilibrium while stationary (static balance) 
or moving (dynamic balance). See also 

skill-related fitness. 

beep baseball. A striking/fielding game in 
which offensive players work in teams to strike 
a ball, then score runs by running to a base that 
is activated to make a sound or a beep. Fielding 
players work together with spotters, who help to 
identify ball position using a numbering system. 
The game is designed to be played by blind and 
visually impaired players along with a sighted 
pitcher and catcher. 

bisexual. A person who is emotionally/ 
romantically/sexually/physically attracted to 
and/or involved with both men and women. 

See also sexual orientation. 

bocce. A target game in which teams attempt to 
score by throwing (or "bowling") larger balls as 
close as possible to a smaller ball (a "jack"). 

body awareness. See movement concepts. 

breath sound check. A self-assessment tool in 
which participants can monitor the intensity of an 
exercise or activity. When participants can "hear 
their own breathing", the intensity of the activity 
is moderate to vigorous and their heart rate will 
be between 55 and 85 per cent of their maximum 
heart rate. 

bidlying. Under the Education Act (s.l(l)), 
"aggressive and typically repeated behaviour by 
a pupil, where (a) the behaviour is intended by 
the pupil to have the effect of, or the pupil ought 
to know that the behaviour would be likely 
to have the effect of, (i) causing harm, fear, or 
distress to another individual, including physical, 
psychological, social, or academic harm, harm 
to the individual's reputation, or harm to the 


individual's property, or (ii) creating a negative 
environment at a school for another individual, 
and (b) the behaviour occurs in a context where 
there is a real or perceived power imbalance 
between the pupil and the individual based on 
factors such as size, strength, age, intelligence, 
peer group power, economic status, social status, 
religion, ethnic origin, sexual orientation, family 
circumstances, gender, gender identity, gender 
expression, race, disability, or the receipt of special 
education" and where the intimidation includes 
the use of any physical, verbal, electronic, written, 
or other means. See also cyber-bullying. 

cardiorespiratory endurance. A health-related 
component of physical fitness that involves the 
ability to perform sustained physical activity 
requiring considerable use of the circulatory 
and respiratory systems. Also referred to as 
cardiovascular endurance, aerobic fitness, or 
cardiorespiratory fitness. See also health-related 
fitness. 

contraception. A term for a variety of methods 
used to prevent pregnancy, including barrier, 
hormonal, natural, and surgical methods. Some 
types of contraception also provide protection 
against sexually transmitted infections. 

cool-down. The transitional process of returning 
the body to its normal state after being physically 
active. A cool-down may consist of slower, gentler 
movements and/or stretches. 

coordination. A skill-related component of 
physical fitness that relates to the ability to 
combine sensory input with the movement 
of body parts in order to perform movement 
skills smoothly and efficiently. See also skill- 
related fitness. 

core muscle strength. The ability of the core 
muscles - the muscles of the abdominal and back 
area - to support the spine and keep the body 
stable and balanced. Core muscles are involved 
in most movements performed during physical 
activity, and strengthening them can reduce 
vulnerability to lower back pain and injury. 


228 



counter-tension. In the context of movement 
done with a partner, the application of each 
partner's body weight and force away from the 
other partner. Partners can use counter-tension at 
different levels and in different directions. Counter¬ 
tension can be contrasted with counter-balance, in 
which body weight and force are applied by each 
partner towards the other partner using a variety 
of body parts as points of contact. 



Counter-balance 

culture. The totality of ideas, beliefs, values, 
knowledge, language, and way of life of a 
group of people who share a certain historical 
background. 

cyber-bullying. Under the Education Act (s.1.0.0.2), 
bullying by electronic means, including by 
"(a) creating a web page or a blog in which the 
creator assumes the identity of another person; 

(b) impersonating another person as the author 
of content or messages posted on the Internet; 
and (c) communicating material electronically to 
more than one individual or posting material on 
a website that may be accessed by one or more 
individuals." Cyber-bullying can involve the use 
of email, cell phones, text messages, and/or social 
media sites to threaten, harass, embarrass, socially 
exclude, or damage reputations and friendships. 

It may include put-downs or insults and can also 
involve spreading rumours; sharing private 
information, photos, or videos; or threatening 
to harm someone. Cyber-bullying is always 
aggressive and hurtful. (Refer to Bullying - 
We Can All Help Stop It: A Guide for Parents of 
Elementary and Secondary School Students, at 
www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/multi/english/ 
BullyingEN.pdf.) 


defence. The practice or role of preventing 
opponents from scoring. See also offence. 

discrimination. Unfair or prejudicial treatment of 
individuals or groups on the basis of grounds set 
out in the Ontario Human Rights Code (e.g., race, 
sexual orientation, disability) or on the basis of 
other factors. Discrimination, whether intentional 
or unintentional, has the effect of preventing or 
limiting access to opportunities, benefits, or 
advantages that are available to other members 
of society. Discrimination may be evident in 
organizational and institutional structures, 
policies, procedures, and programs, as well as 
in the attitudes and behaviours of individuals. 

dominant hand/foot. Refers to the hand or foot 
that an individual feels most comfortable using. 
For example, a right-handed student may be more 
comfortable throwing with his or her right hand. 
The non-dominant hand or foot is the other hand 
or foot. It is important for students to have 
opportunities to practise skills with both their 
dominant and non-dominant hands and feet. 

downward dog pose. A static balance with hands 
and feet on the floor and hips in the air. Hands 
and feet are both shoulder-width apart. Arms, 
legs, and back are straight, or as straight as 
possible, and the backs of the legs are stretched. 
The student pushes down through the shoulders 
and arms, which lengthens the spine. The hips 
are pushed back and up, with weight evenly 
distributed between hands and feet. 



dynamic balance. A type of stability skill in which 
core strength is used to maintain balance and 
control of the body while moving through space. 
See also stability. 

effort awareness. See movement concepts. 

epinephrine autoinjector. A syringe used to inject 
potentially lifesaving epinephrine (adrenaline) 
into someone who is experiencing anaphylaxis. 
See also anaphylaxis. 




229 


GLOSSARY 




THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


execution. The action phase of movement, which 
includes the movements prior to producing force, 
including gathering momentum, and the instant 
when force is applied to carry out the movement 
skill. The body is positioned, weight is transferred, 
and joints work together to produce the action. 

See also follow-through, phases of movement, 
and preparation. 

external stimuli affecting movement. Any force 
outside of the body that can have an impact on 
an intended movement. External stimuli could 
include environmental factors such as wind, sun, 
or temperature. It could also include factors such 
as music, equipment, or teammates. 

fair play. An attitude or way of thinking that is 
based on the principles of integrity, fairness, and 
respect and the equitable or impartial treatment 
of all participants in an activity. 

fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). A term 
used to describe a range of disabilities that may 
affect people whose mothers drank alcohol while 
they were pregnant. (From Public Health Agency of 
Canada, "Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder [FASD]: 
Frequently Asked Questions", www.phac-aspc. 
gc.ca/hp-ps/dca-dea/prog-ini/fasd-etcaf / faq/ 
index-eng.php [accessed January 27, 2015].) 

fitness. See health-related fitness and physical 
fitness. 

fitness circuit. A series of stations, each set up for a 
different physical activity that targets a particular 
aspect of fitness; for example, a flexibility station 
where students work on sitting and reaching 
forward, or a cardiorespiratory fitness station 
where students work on continuous skipping. 
Circuits may be organized in a number of ways, 
including a closely structured format where each 
student visits every station for a specified period 
of time, or a less structured format where students 
choose stations that correspond with their fitness 
goals and may choose to visit some stations more 
than once. Music may be used as a motivator for 
students and as a stop / start indication to signal 
when it is time to change stations. 


flexibility. A health-related component of 
physical fitness involving the ability to move a 
joint through its full range of motion. See also 

health-related fitness. 

follow-through. The final phase of movement, 
which includes the movements after the instant 
when force is applied. In this phase, the transfer 
of weight is completed, movement continues in 
the direction of action, the movement slows down, 
and stability is regained. See also execution, phases 
of movement, and preparation. 

four-point balance. Any static balance in which 
four body parts are touching the ground. See also 

three-point balance and two-point balance. 



®@ ® © ®© ® © ©© @© 


gallop. A locomotor movement in which the 
body moves forward or backwards. To gallop, 
students step forward with one foot and quickly 
draw the second foot up to the first foot, then 
repeat. Knees are bent slightly and arms stay out 
for balance. Galloping is a fundamental skill that 
can be used as students learn more complex skills. 
By learning to balance the body and control the 
motion, students can apply this action to other, 
more complex skills or combine it with other 
actions. See also skip and slide. 

gay. An individual who is emotionally/ 
romantically/sexually/physically attracted to and/ 
or involved with other individuals of the same sex. 

gay-straight alliance. A student-run club that 
provides a safe space for any and all students to 
meet and learn about different sexual orientations, 
socialize, support each other, talk about issues 
related to sexual orientation and gender identity, 
and work to end homophobia and to raise 
awareness and promote equality for all. 

(Adapted from Canadian Federation for 
Sexual Health, "How to Form a Gay/Straight 
Alliance", www.cfsh.ca/Your_Sexual_Health/ 
Gender-Identity-and-Sexual-Orientation/Gay- 
Straight-Alliance.aspx [accessed January 27,2015].) 


230 



gender. A term that refers to those characteristics 
of women and men that are socially constructed. 
See also gender identity and sex. 

gender-based violence. Any form of behaviour - 
including psychological, physical, and sexual 
behaviour - that is based on an individual's 
gender and is intended to control, humiliate, 
or harm the individual. This form of violence 
is generally directed at women and girls and 
is based on an attitude or prejudice, which can 
be conscious or unconscious and which exists on 
the individual and institutional level, that aims 
to subordinate an individual or group on the 
basis of sex and /or gender identity. 

gender expression. The manner in which 
individuals express their gender identity to 
others. A person's gender expression is often 
based on a social construct of gender, which is 
either stereotypically male or female. However, 
some individuals who do not see themselves 
as being either male or female but as some 
combination of the two genders, or as without 
gender, choose to express their identity in terms 
of a multiple model of gender, mixing both male 
and female expressions. 

gender identity. A person's sense of self, with 
respect to being male or female. Gender identity 
is different from sexual orientation, and may be 
different from birth-assigned sex. (Refer to the 
Ontario Human Rights Commission's Policy on 
Discrimination and Harassment because of Gender 
Identity, at www.ohrc.on.ca.) 


give and go. A type of play used, most often in 
territory activities, as a strategy for maintaining 
possession of the object and moving it down the 
playing area towards the goal. During this play, 
Player A passes the object to Player B ("give"). 
Then Player A moves quickly ahead, towards the 
goal or an open space ("go"). Player A remains 
ready to receive the object back from Player B. 
After Player A has moved ahead. Player B tries 
to pass the object back. The object is now closer 
to the goal. @ @ 

y 


® ®- 

t 

® ® ■ 


® 


goal ball. A territory activity in which players 
work in teams of three to score by throwing a ball 
across an end goal line. Primarily played by blind 
and visually impaired players. 

grapevine step. A step sequence used in many 
dances. This step can be performed in any 
direction - left, right, forward, back, or diagonally. 
A grapevine step to the right would be performed 
as follows. Step to the right with the right foot. 
Step behind with the left foot. Step to the right 
with the right foot again. Bring the left foot 
beside the right foot to finish. 




Step R Behind L Step R Close 


harassment. A form of discrimination that 
may include unwelcome attention and remarks, 
jokes, threats, name-calling, touching, or other 
behaviour (including the display of pictures) that 
insults, offends, or demeans someone because 
of his or her identity. Harassment involves 
conduct or comments that are known to be, or 
should reasonably be known to be, offensive, 
inappropriate, intimidating, and hostile. 

health-related fitness. Refers to the components of 
physical fitness that contribute to optimal health. 
For the purposes of this document, the components 
are defined as cardiovascular fitness, flexibility, 
muscular endurance, and muscular strength. 

Body composition is a fifth component of health- 
related fitness. 

HIV/AIDS. HIV stands for Human Immuno¬ 
deficiency Virus. This is the virus that leads to 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). 

homeopathy. A system of medicine in which 
disease is treated by giving patients tiny amounts 
of natural substances with the intention of 
stimulating the body's natural healing abilities. 


231 


GLOSSARY 









THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


homophobia. A disparaging or hostile attitude or 
a negative bias, which may be overt or unspoken 
and which may exist at an individual and/or a 
systemic level, towards people who are lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT). 

hop. A locomotor movement that involves taking 
off on one foot and landing on the same foot. The 
movement includes a take-off phase (preparation), 
a flight phase (execution), and a landing (follow- 
through). See also jump, leap, and phases of 
movement. 

individual activities. Activities in which students 
work individually with their own equipment. 

In this way, opportunities for participation are 
maximized. In this document, the term "individual 
activities" is used to refer to physical activities that 
are not structured as games. Students can engage in 
these activities while also interacting with others, 
such as in dancing or canoeing. For more on 
individual activities, see pp. 32-33. See also 
modified activities. 

insulin therapy pump. A method of delivering 
insulin for people with diabetes. This method 
includes a device with a small catheter, which 
is inserted under the skin, and a pump, which is 
worn outside the body. The pump has a reservoir 
and can be programmed to deliver small amounts 
of insulin on a particular schedule. The device has 
a button that can be pressed to deliver extra doses 
of insulin when necessary, such as at mealtimes. 
(Adapted from Canadian Diabetes Association, 
"Thinking of Starting Insulin", www.diabetes.ca/ 
diabetes-and-you/healthy-living-resources/ 
blood-glucose-insulin / thinking-of-starting-insulin 
[accessed January 27, 2015].) 

intersex. A term used to describe a person whose 
sex chromosomes, genitalia, and/or secondary 
sex characteristics (e.g., facial hair, breasts) are 
determined to be neither exclusively male nor 
female. An intersex person may have biological 
characteristics of both the male and female sexes. 
The intersex community has generally rejected 
the term "hermaphrodite"as outdated. Intersex 
people may or may not identify as part of the 
transgender community. See also gender identity, 


transgender, and transsexual. (Adapted from 
Canadian Federation for Sexual Health, "Gender 
Identity and Sexual Orientation", www.cfsh.ca/ 
Your_Sexual_Health / Gender-Identity-and-Sexual- 
Orientation/ [accessed January 27,2015].) 

jump. A locomotor movement that involves taking 
off and landing with two feet. The movement 
includes a take-off phase (preparation), a flight 
phase (execution), and a landing (follow-through). 

See also hop, leap, and phases of movement. 

kendo. A physical activity from Japan that 
combines martial arts values with sport-like 
physical elements. It involves the use of bamboo 
swords. 

knee scale. A static balance performed with both 
hands and one knee and lower leg as the contact 
points on the ground and the other leg extended 
behind the body. Head is up and the body is held 
tight for balance. See also standing scale. 



leap. A locomotor movement that involves 
taking off from one foot and landing on the other. 
Leaping is performed much like running, but the 
flight phase is longer. See also hop, jump, and 
phases of movement. 

lesbian. A woman who is emotionally/ 
romantically/sexually/physically attracted 
to and/or involved with another woman. 

locomotion, locomotor movement. A type of 
movement skill used to move the body from 
one point to another in various ways. See also 

movement skills. 

manipulation. The act of giving force to or 
receiving force from objects as one sends, receives, 
or retains them. See also movement skills, 
receiving, retaining, and sending. 

mental health. All aspects of a person's well-being 
that affect his or her emotions, learning, and 
behaviour. It is important to note that mental 
health is not merely the absence of mental illness. 


232 




mental illness. Any emotional, behavioural, or 
brain-related condition that causes significant 
impairment in functioning as defined in 
standard diagnostic protocols such as the 
American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual (DSM). (Adapted from 
Ministry of Children and Youth Services, A Shared 
Responsibility: Ontario's Policy Frameworkfor Child 
and Youth Mental Health, 2009, 22.) 

moderate to vigorous physical activity. The 
degree to which an activity is moderate to 
vigorous is directly related to its ability to raise 
the heart rate, to improve cardiorespiratory fitness, 
and to maintain this increase for a sustained 
period of time. Moderate to vigorous physical 
activities are aerobic in nature, enhancing the 
health of the heart and lungs, dependent on the 
frequency, intensity, time, and type of activity. 

modified activities, modified games. Activities 
or games that have been altered from their 
traditional or formal structure to allow for 
maximum participation or to allow students of 
differing experiences and abilities to participate. 

For example, two-on-two basketball is a modified 
version of basketball; multi-base baseball is a 
modified version of softball. 

movement concepts. A framework for increasing 
the effectiveness of movement by helping 
students become more skilful, knowledgeable, 
and expressive in their movements. Movement 
concepts include body awareness, spatial 
awareness, effort awareness, and relationship. 

(See p. 30 for examples.) 

movement principles. A set of biomechanical 
principles that can be applied to improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of movements. The 
principles are related to stability, effort, and 
motion in different directions. Application of these 
principles becomes more refined as movement 
competence increases. (See p. 31 for examples.) 

movement skills. These skills (stability, locomotion, 
and manipulation) are the foundation of all 
physical activity and are essential both to an 
individual's development of effective motor 


skills and to the application of these skills in 
a wide variety of physical activities. See also 

locomotion, manipulation, and stability. 

movement strategies. A term encompassing a 
variety of approaches that help a player or team 
attain the ultimate goal or objective of an activity 
or game, such as moving to an open space to be 
in a position to receive an object or hitting an 
object away from opponents to make it difficult 
for opponents to retrieve the object. Similar 
activities within game categories often employ 
common or similar strategies. (See p. 31 for 
further information.) 

muscular endurance. A health-related component 
of physical fitness that relates to the muscle's 
ability to continue to exert force over a period 
of time without fatigue. See also health-related 
fitness. 

muscular strength. A health-related component 
of physical fitness that relates to the ability of the 
muscle to exert force or maximum effort. See also 

health-related fitness. 

naturopathy. A system of medicine in which disease 
is treated by the use of a variety of natural remedies 
rather than by drugs or surgery. 

net!wall activities. Activities in which players 
send an object towards a court or target area that 
their opponent(s) are defending. The aim is to 
make it difficult for opponent(s) to return the 
object and to cause it to land in the target area. 

nutrient. A substance that provides essential 
nourishment. Types of nutrients include 
carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, 
and minerals. 

obesity. An accumulation of excess body fat. 
Obesity occurs when a person consumes more 
food energy than is needed to provide for all of 
the day's activities, including work and exercise. 
Obesity is a risk factor in a number of chronic 
diseases. Achieving and maintaining a healthy 
weight is important for reducing the risk of 
those diseases and improving overall health. 


233 


GLOSSARY 



THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


offence. The practice or role of working proactively 
to gain an advantage and score. See also defence. 

open space. During game play, refers to the part 
of the playing area that is clear and available for 
movement at any given time. Players use open 
spaces during games to receive passes and move 
without obstacles. Strategically, students may use 
open space differently in different categories of 
activities, such as hitting to open spaces in striking/ 
fielding or net/wall activities, or running to open 
spaces that are close to the goal area in territory 
activities. 

pedometer. A small, portable electronic device that 
automatically counts each step a person takes in 
a day. Some pedometers are able to multiply the 
number of steps by the wearer's step length to 
calculate the distance the wearer has walked 
that day. 

phases of movement. The three parts that a 
fundamental movement skill can be broken into: 
a preparation phase, an execution phase, and a 
follow-through phase. Practising a skill with these 
three phases in mind can help a student perform 
the skill more effectively and efficiently. See also 
execution, follow-through, movement skills, 
and preparation. 

physical fitness. A state of well-being that allows 
people to perform daily activities with vigour, 
reduces the risk of health problems related to lack 
of physical activity, and establishes a fitness base 
for participation in a variety of physical activities. 

Pilates. A type of physical activity focused on 
building core muscle strength through the use 
of stretches, strength-building activities, and 
focused breathing. 

plank balance. A static balance performed with 
hands on the floor and shoulder width apart, and 
the body stretched out with the feet on the floor. 
The hips should be aligned so that the back and 
legs form a straight line, with the hips neither 
sagging down or sticking up. To hold this position, 
core muscles need to be held tight. A plank balance 
can also be performed in different positions, such as 


on the forearms instead of the hands or with the 
elbows bent and the hands holding the body close 
to the ground. See also static balance. 



power. A skill-related component of physical 
fitness that combines strength and speed and 
relates to the ability to perform the greatest effort 
in the shortest time. See also skill-related fitness. 

preparation. The initial phase of movement, 
which involves getting the body ready to initiate 
a movement. This phase includes ensuring that 
the feet are in a position such that they are ready 
to move, and lowering the centre of gravity to 
create a stable body position. See also execution, 
follow-through, and phases of movement. 

problematic substance use. Refers to the use of 
substances in ways that are potentially harmful. 
The term encompasses both substance misuse, 
which is the use of substances in ways that are 
illegal or not recommended medically, and 
substance abuse, which involves excessive use of 
substances despite the physical, mental, emotional, 
social, legal, or economic harm that this use may 
cause to oneself or others. 

protective factors. Traits, characteristics, or 
environmental contexts that research has shown 
to promote positive mental health in childhood 
or adolescence. Examples of protective factors 
include personal strengths (e.g., intelligence, 
relaxed temperament), family strengths (e.g., a 
supportive home environment, socio-economic 
advantages), and school and community strengths 
(e.g., safe and effective schools; participation in 
social groups; having at least one significant, 
caring relationship with an adult). Enhancement 
of protective factors at the individual, family, and 
community level is now believed to reduce the 
likelihood of mental health problems and illnesses 
later in life. See also resilience and risk factors. 
(Adapted from Ministry of Children and Youth 
Services, A Shared Responsibility: Ontario's Policy 
Framework for Child and Youth Mental Health, 

2009, 24.) 


234 



qigong. A type of physical exercise and meditative 
practice from China that uses slow movements and 
controlled breathing. The intent of the movements 
is to enhance the movement of energy throughout 
the body. Some of the movements are similar to 
ones used in t'ai chi or yoga. Qigong is pronounced 
"chee-gung". 

reaction time. A skill-related component of 
physical fitness that relates to the length of time 
between stimulation and response. See also 

skill-related fitness. 

ready position. A stance used in many sports and 
activities, in which the body is in a position that 
allows it to move and respond easily. Knees are 
bent, feet are apart, head is up, arms are out for 
balance, and attention is focused. 

receiving. A manipulation skill that relates to the 
intent to catch an incoming object. Receiving skills 
include catching, trapping, and collecting. Basic 
skills associated with receiving include keeping 
one's eyes on the object, anticipating where the 
object will arrive and moving to get into position, 
and preparing the body by being in a ready 
position with weight evenly distributed, knees 
bent, and a low centre of gravity. See also 
manipulation and ready position. 

recovery time. The length of time that it takes for 
the heart to return to its regular (resting) rate after 
physical activity. 

recreational activities. Physical activities that an 
individual or group chooses to do to make their 
leisure time interesting, enjoyable, and personally 
satisfying. Recreational activities include hiking 
and walking for pleasure, gardening, participating 
in sports, and doing a wide variety of other indoor 
and outdoor physical activities. 

relationship (movement concept). See movement 
concepts. 

resilience. The ability to recover quickly or 
"bounce back" from disruptive change, illness, or 
misfortune without being overwhelmed or acting 
in dysfunctional ways. Resilient people possess 
the skills to cope with life's challenges, respond 


to stress, and move forward. Children and youth 
have a naturally resilient nature, but it must be 
nurtured and strengthened, particularly in the 
face of one or more risk factors for mental health 
problems or illness. See also protective factors and 
risk factors. (Adapted from Ministry of Children 
and Youth Services, A Shared Responsibility: 
Ontario's Policy Framework for Child and Youth 
Mental Health, 2009, 25.) 

restorative justice. A response to wrongdoing that 
focuses on a healing process for those affected by 
inappropriate behaviour and on the opportunity 
for the individual responsible for the wrongdoing 
to fully understand the impact of his or her actions, 
take responsibility, and have the opportunity 
to take action to help with the repair process. 
Restorative justice strategies used in schools could 
include peer mediation, healing circles, and group 
conferencing. Restorative justice is also the basis 
for a broader concept called restorative practices. 

retaining. A manipulation skill that relates to the 
intent to maintain possession of an object while 
stationary or moving. Retaining skills include 
carrying (for example, holding a football while 
running); dribbling (for example, bouncing a 
basketball with a hand or controlling a soccer ball 
with the feet); and cradling (for example, keeping 
an object tucked close to the body or protecting an 
object while carrying it in a scoop or the pocket of a 
lacrosse stick). Basic skills associated with retaining 
include being able to change directions, controlling 
the object with either the hand or the foot, and 
maintaining control. See also manipulation. 

rhythmic activities. A term encompassing a 
variety of movement-based activities, including 
dance, gymnastics, and creative movement. 

Music or instruments may be used to provide 
opportunities to move in response to a beat 
or sound. 

risk factors. Traits, characteristics, or environmental 
contexts that research has shown to be predictive 
of mental health problems or illnesses in childhood 
or adolescence. Examples of risk factors include a 
child or youth living in poverty, having parents 
with limited parenting skills or mental illness, 
abuse of alcohol and/or drugs, the lack of 


235 


GLOSSARY 



THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


experience of success in school, premature birth, 
or low birth weight. The effect of a given risk 
factor tends to be stronger when it is combined 
with other risk factors, may vary during different 
periods of a child or youth's life, and is often 
cumulative. See also protective factors and 
resilience. (Adapted from Ministry of Children 
and Youth Services, A Shared Responsibility: 
Ontario's Policy Framework for Child and Youth 
Mental Health, 2009,24.) 

rounders. A striking/fielding game in which 
offensive players work in teams to strike a ball, 
then score runs by running to bases. Fielding 
players work together to retrieve the ball and 
get offensive players out by catching the ball, 
tagging a base, or tagging a runner. The game 
is very similar to softball, with some rule and 
equipment variations. 

sacred medicines. In many Aboriginal cultures, the 
four sacred medicines are tobacco, cedar, sage, and 
sweetgrass. These medicines are used in personal 
and ceremonial contexts for purification of the 
mind, body, and spirit. 

scale. See knee scale and standing scale. 

self-concept. The perception a person has of his 
or her own identity. People form their self-concept 
using interpretations of information they acquire 
about themselves through experiences and 
interactions with others and their environment. 

A person's self-concept can be influenced by the 
opinions of others, reinforcement of behaviour, 
and explanations or understanding of one's own 
behaviour or actions. Unlike self-esteem, self- 
concept is not positive or negative, but rather 
accurate or inaccurate, or extensive or narrow. 

sending. A manipulation skill that relates to intent 
to move an object away from oneself. Sending 
skills include throwing, kicking, striking, punting, 
and volleying. Basic skills associated with sending 
include balancing the body to prepare, transferring 
body weight as the object is sent, and following 
through. See also manipulation and phases 
of movement. 


sepak takraw. Anet/wall game also known as 
kick volleyball. The game originated in Malaysia, 
and variations are played in other South Asian 
countries and around the world. It is played with 
a woven rattan ball or a synthetic version of this 
ball. Players in teams of three use the feet, knees, 
chest, and other body parts - but not the hands - 
to pass the ball to each other and move the ball 
over the net. 

seven grandfather teachings. The principles and 
values central to the Anishinabe People: honesty, 
humility, bravery/courage, wisdom, respect, truth, 
and love. 

seven stages of life. First Nation, Metis, and Inuit 
cultures use a variety of conceptual frameworks, 
often in stages, to represent the journey of life. 
Each stage has its own unique challenges and gifts 
for the individual, the family, and the community. 
The seven stages of life is a framework used by the 
Anishinabe People. 

sex. The category of male or female, based on 
characteristics that are biologically determined. 

See also gender and gender identity. 

sexual health. A state of physical, emotional, 
mental, and social well-being in relation to 
sexuality; it is not merely the absence of disease, 
dysfunction, or infirmity. Sexual health requires a 
positive and respectful approach to sexuality and 
sexual relationships, as well as the possibility of 
having pleasurable and safe sexual experiences, 
free of coercion, discrimination, and violence. 

For sexual health to be attained and maintained, 
the sexual rights of all persons must be respected, 
protected, and fulfilled. Sexual health is influenced 
by a complex web of factors ranging from sexual 
behaviours, attitudes, and societal factors to 
biological risk and genetic predispositions. 

(From Public Health Agency of Canada, 

Canadian Guidelines for Sexual Health Education, 

[rev. ed.], 2008,5.) 

sexual orientation. A person's sense of sexual 
attraction to people of the same sex, the opposite 
sex, or both sexes. (Refer to the Ontario Human 


236 



Rights Commission's Policy on Discrimination 
and Harassment because of Sexual Orientation, 
at www.ohrc.on.ca.) 

sexuality. A term that encompasses sex, gender 
identities and roles, sexual orientation, eroticism, 
pleasure, intimacy, and reproduction. Sexuality is 
experienced and expressed in thoughts, fantasies, 
desires, beliefs, attitudes, values, behaviours, 
practices, roles, and relationships. While sexuality 
can include all of these dimensions, not all of them 
are always experienced or expressed. Sexuality 
is influenced by the interaction of biological, 
psychological, social, economic, political, cultural, 
ethical, legal, historical, religious, and spiritual 
factors. (From Public Health Agency of Canada, 
Canadian Guidelines for Sexual Health Education, 

[rev. ed.], 2008, 5.) 

skill-related fitness. Refers to the components 
of physical fitness that are related to quality 
of movement and enhanced performance with 
respect to sports and motor skills. The components 
are commonly defined as balance, coordination, 
agility, speed, power, and reaction time. Skill- 
related fitness is sometimes referred to as motor 
fitness or performance-related fitness. 

skip. A locomotor movement that involves 
rhythmically alternating steps followed by a hop 
with the lead foot. Skipping can be performed 
forward or backwards. To skip forward, students 
take a step forward with one foot, hop on that 
foot, then step forward with the other foot and 
hop on that foot. Then the whole sequence is 
repeated. Knees are slightly bent, and arms can 
be moved forward and back to help with rhythm. 
Skipping is a more complex action than galloping 
or sliding and is generally best taught after 
students have learned to gallop and slide. 

See also gallop and slide. 

sledge hockey. A territory game similar to ice 
hockey, played with six players on each team, 
including a goalie. Players sit on a sledge, which is 
a narrow platform with skate blades attached to the 
bottom, and propel themselves using two specially 
constructed hockey sticks that have picks on 


the end. The specially designed sledges can 
be adapted to meet the needs of each player. 
Primarily played by players with a wide range 
of physical disabilities, including but not limited 
to wheelchair users, amputees, people with spinal 
cord injuries, and people with cerebral palsy. 

slide. A locomotor movement in which the body 
moves sideways. To slide, students step to the side 
with one foot and quickly draw the second foot 
over to the first foot, then repeat. Knees are bent 
slightly, and arms stay out for balance. Sliding is 
a fundamental skill that allows students to make 
quick lateral (sideways) movements in a number 
of activities. See also gallop. 

smudging. A practice used by some First Nations, 
involving fanning smoke from herbs such as sage 
or sweetgrass over their bodies. The practice is 
used to cleanse a person of bad feelings, get rid 
of negative thoughts and energy, and provide 
a sense of physical, emotional, mental, and 
spiritual renewal. 

spatial awareness. See movement concepts. 

specialized equipment. A term encompassing a 
variety of materials designed to help students 
with a variety of needs to participate in physical 
activity. For example, specialized equipment 
might include balls of different sizes, colours, 
weights, and / or textures to make the ball easier 
to see, feel, or catch, or balls with a bell inside to 
help a student who is unable to see to track the 
ball using the auditory cue. 

speed. A skill-related component of physical 
fitness that relates to the ability to move from 
one point to another within a short period of time. 
See also skill-related fitness. 

stability. Stability skills involve the ability to 
balance the body in one place (static) or keep 
the body balanced while moving (dynamic) by 
sensing a shift in the relationship of the body parts 
and altering body position to maintain balance. 

See also dynamic balance, movement skills, and 
static balance. 


237 


GLOSSARY 



THE ONTARIO CURRICULUM, GRADES 1-8 | Health and Physical Education 


standing scale. A static balance performed with 
one foot as the contact point on the ground and 
one leg extended behind the body. Head is up, 
arms are out, and the body is held tight for 
balance. See also knee scale. 



static balance. A stability skill in which the body 
maintains a desired shape in a stationary position. 
See also stability. 

stereotype. A false or generalized, and usually 
negative, conception of a group of people 
that results in the unconscious or conscious 
categorization of each member of that group, 
without regard for individual differences. 
Stereotyping may be based on race, ancestry, 
place of origin, colour, ethnic origin, citizenship, 
creed, sex, sexual orientation, age, marital status, 
family status, or disability, as set out in the Ontario 
Human Rights Code, or on the basis of other factors. 

stickhandling. A method of retaining or 
maintaining possession of an object while moving, 
using a stick such as a hockey, field hockey, or 
ringette stick. See also manipulation and retaining. 

stork stand. A static balance performed by 
standing on one foot and holding the other foot 
against the supporting leg. Arms may be out to 
the sides or held above the head, or the hands 
may be placed on the waist. 


systems thinking. A method of thinking and 
problem-solving in which elements are considered 
as part of a complex whole, rather than in isolation. 
Analysing the ways in which elements interact 
with and depend on each other can yield greater 
understanding than looking at each element 
separately. 

talk test. A simple assessment tool that students 
can use to monitor their level of exertion during 
moderate to vigorous activity to ensure that they 
are at a level that is appropriate for their training 
and participation goals and optimal for improving 
cardio-respiratory endurance. During moderate 
activity, students can hear their own breathing 
and can talk comfortably. During more vigorous 
activity, students can still talk, but it is more 
challenging to do so. See also moderate to 
vigorous physical activity. 

target activities. Activities in which players score 
by avoiding obstacles to get an object closer to 
a target or hit a target more often than their 
opponents. 

tchoukball. A territory game in which players 
score by throwing and bouncing a ball on a small 
trampoline-like goal set up at each end of the 
playing area. Tchoukball is a no-contact game. 

territory activities. Activities that involve 
controlling an object, keeping it away from 
opponents, and moving it into position to score. 
The same playing area is shared by both offensive 
and defensive players as they work to prevent the 
other team from scoring. 


O 


> 


three-point balance. Any static balance in which 
three body parts are touching the ground. See also 

four-point balance and two-point balance. 


striking/fielding activities. Activities in which 
striking players try to score by striking an object 
and running to designated playing areas (bases) 
while fielding players try to prevent them from 
scoring by retrieving the object and returning it 
to stop the play. 



© ©@ ©© © ©© © © ® © 


238 







training principles. The factors that need to be 
considered for improving and maintaining fitness. 
A handy mnemonic is the FITT principle: frequency 
(how often different body parts are exercised); 
intensity (the level of physical exertion); time 
(duration of the activity); and type of exercise. 

The concepts in the FITT principle are tied to the 
principles of overload (working the muscles more 
than accustomed), specificity (improving specific 
body parts with specific activities), and progression 
(gradually increasing the amount or intensity 
of activity). 

transgender. A transgender person is a person 
whose gender identity, outward appearance, 
gender expression, and / or anatomy are not 
consistent with the conventional definitions or 
expectations of male and female; often used to 
represent a wide range of gender identities and 
behaviours. 

transsexual. A person who experiences intense 
personal and emotional discomfort with his or her 
assigned birth gender and may undergo treatment 
to transition gender. (Adapted from Public Flealth 
Agency of Canada, Canadian Guidelines for Sexual 
Health Education [rev. ed.], 2008, 52.) 

travelling skills. See locomotion, locomotor 
movement. 

two-point balance. Any static balance in which 
two body parts are touching the ground. See also 

four-point balance and three-point balance. 


v-sit. A static balance performed with the buttocks 
on the ground and legs held tight and together in 
the air. Arms can support the body or be held at 
the sides or over the head. See also static balance. 



warm-up. The process of preparing the body for 
more vigorous activity by moving muscles and 
joints lightly and gradually increasing intensity 
of movement. 



two-spirited. A term used by First Nations people 
to refer to a person having both the feminine and 
masculine spirits. It includes sexual or gender 
identity, sexual orientation, social roles, and a 
broad range of identities, such as lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender. 


239 


GLOSSARY 







The Ministry of Education wishes to acknowledge 
the contribution of the many individuals, groups, and 
organizations that participated in the development 
and refinement of this curriculum policy document. 



® 

Printed on recycled paper 
14-058 

ISBN 978-1-4606-0390-1 (Print) 
ISBN 978-1-4606-0391-8 (PDF) 

© Queen’s Printer for Ontario, 2015 
