Health and Physical Education - Interim Edition - 2010 

The Ontario Curriculum, Grades 1-8 (Revised)
ISBN 978-1-4435-3530-4 (Print)
ISBN 978-1-4435-3531-1 (PDF)
ISBN 978-1-4435-3532-8 (TXT) 


INTRODUCTION

This document, an interim edition of the revised health and physical education curriculum policy document, replaces The Ontario Curriculum, Grades 1–8: Health and Physical Education, 1998. Beginning in September 2010, and until the release of the final revised edition of the document, all health and physical education programs for Grades 1 to 8 will be based on the expectations outlined in this document. In this interim edition, the expectations from the Growth and Development section of the 1998 curriculum document are included in the Healthy Living strand.


ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY

Ontario elementary schools strive to support high-quality learning while giving every student the opportunity to learn in the way that is best suited to his or her individual strengths and needs. The Ontario curriculum is designed to help every student reach his or her full potential through a program of learning that is coherent, relevant, and ageappropriate. It recognizes that, today and in the future, students need to be critically literate in order to synthesize information, make informed decisions, communicate effectively, and thrive in an ever-changing global community. It is important that students be connected to the curriculum; that they see themselves in what is taught, how it is taught, and how it applies to the world at large. The curriculum recognizes that the needs of learners are diverse, and helps all learners develop the knowledge, skills, and perspectives they need to be informed, productive, caring, responsible, healthy, and active citizens in their own communities and in the world.


VISION AND GOALS OF THE HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM

The revised health and physical education curriculum is based on the vision that the knowledge and skills acquired in the program will benefit students throughout their lives and help them to thrive in an ever-changing world by enabling them to acquire physical and health literacy and to develop the comprehension, capacity, and commitment needed to lead healthy, active lives and to promote healthy, active living. The goals of the health and physical education program are as follows.

Students will develop: 
• the living skills needed to develop resilience and a secure identity and sense of self, through opportunities to learn adaptive, management, and coping skills, to practise communication skills, to learn how to build relationships and interact positively with others, and to learn how to use critical and creative thinking processes;

• the skills and knowledge that will enable them to enjoy being active and healthy throughout their lives, through opportunities to participate regularly and safely in physical activity and to learn how to develop and improve their own personal fitness; the movement competence needed to participate in a range of physical activities, through opportunities to develop movement skills and to apply movement concepts and strategies in games, sports, dance, and other physical activities;

• an understanding of the factors that contribute to healthy development, a sense of personal responsibility for lifelong health, and an understanding of how living healthy, active lives is connected with the world around them and the health of others.

The knowledge and skills acquired in health education and physical education form an integrated whole that relates to the everyday experiences of students and provides them with the physical literacy and health literacy they need to lead healthy, active lives.

Physical Literacy

Individuals who are physically literate move with competence in a wide variety of physical activities that benefit the development of the whole person. Physically literate individuals consistently develop the motivation and ability to understand, communicate, apply, and analyze different forms of movement. They are able to demonstrate a variety of movements confidently, competently, creatively, and strategically across a wide range of health-related physical activities. These skills enable individuals to make healthy, active choices throughout their life span that are both beneficial to and respectful of themselves, others, and their environment. 
J. Mandigo, N. Francis, K. Lodewyk, and R. Lopez, “Physical Literacy for Educators”, Physical and Health Education Journal 75, no. 3 (2009): 27–30.

Health Literacy

Health literacy involves the skills needed to get, understand and use information to make good decisions for health. The Canadian Public Health Association’s Expert Panel on Health Literacy defines it as the ability to access, understand, evaluate and communicate information as a way to promote, maintain and improve health in a variety of settings across the life-course. 
Irving Rootman and Deborah Gordon-El-Bihbety, A Vision for a Health Literate Canada: Report of the Expert Panel on Health Literacy (Ottawa: Canadian Public Health Association, 2008).

THE IMPORTANCE OF HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION IN THE CURRICULUM

The health and physical education curriculum helps students develop an understanding of what they need in order to make a commitment to lifelong healthy, active living and develop the capacity to live satisfying, productive lives. Healthy, active living benefits both individuals and society in many ways – for example, by increasing productivity and readiness for learning, improving morale, decreasing absenteeism, reducing health-care costs, decreasing anti-social behaviour such as bullying and violence, promoting safe and healthy relationships, and heightening personal satisfaction. Research has shown a connection between increased levels of physical activity and better academic achievement, better concentration, better classroom behaviour, and more focused learning. Other benefits include improvements in psychological well-being, physical capacity, self-concept, and the ability to cope with stress. The expectations that make up this curriculum also provide the opportunity for students to develop social skills and emotional well-being. This practical, balanced approach will help students move successfully through elementary and secondary school and beyond. In health and physical education, students will learn the skills needed to be successful in life as active, socially responsible citizens.

Graphic from page 5 is omitted, text only
Healthy Active Living
Critical and Crative Thinking Skills
Personal Skills
Interpersonal Skills
Living Skils
Movement Competence
Active Living
Healthy Living
Physical Literacy: Active Participation, Physical Fitness, Safety
Healthy Literacy: Understanding Health Concept, Making Health Choices, Making connections for Health Living

Eng of Graphic Text

The health and physical education curriculum promotes important educational values and goals that support the development of character. These include striving to achieve one’s personal best, equity and fair play, respect for diversity, sensitivity and respect for individual requirements and needs, and good health and well-being. These values are reinforced in other curriculum areas, as well as by society itself. Working together, schools and communities can be powerful allies in motivating students to achieve their potential and lead healthy, active lives.

The content and the setting of learning in health and physical education make it unique in a student’s school experience. Students are given opportunities to learn by doing. Their experiences in the program can include participating kinesthetically in activities in a gymnasium, in open spaces in the school, and outdoors; working with various types of equipment; working in a variety of group contexts; and discussing topics that have deep personal relevance and meaning. Students have opportunities to learn through creative work, collaboration, and hands-on experiences. 

Fundamental Principles in Health and Physical Education

The revised health and physical education curriculum for students in Grades 1 to 8 and in the Healthy Active Living Education courses in Grades 9 to 12 is founded on the following principles:

1. Health and physical education programs are most effective when they are delivered in healthy schools and when students’ learning is supported by school staff, families, and communities. 
When students see the concepts they are learning in health and physical education reflected and reinforced through healthy-school policies and healthy practices in their families and communities, their learning is validated and reinforced. Students are then more likely to adopt healthy active living practices and maintain them throughout their lives.

2. Physical activity is the key vehicle for student learning. 
Health and physical education offers students a unique opportunity for kinesthetic learning – they learn about healthy, active living primarily by “doing”, that is, through physical activity. In health and physical education, students discover the joy of movement, learn about their bodies, and develop physical and cognitive skills that will contribute to their lifelong health and well-being.

3. Physical and emotional safety is a precondition for effective learning in health and physical education. 
Students learn best in an environment that is physically and emotionally safe. In health and physical education, students are learning new skills and participating in a physical environment where there is inherent risk. They are learning in a public space where others can see them explore, learn, succeed, and make mistakes. They discuss health topics that have implications for their personal health and well-being. It is critical that teachers provide a physically and emotionally safe environment for learning by emphasizing the importance of safety in physical activity, treating students with respect at all times, being sensitive to individual differences, following all board safety guidelines, and providing an inclusive learning environment that accommodates individual strengths, needs, and interests.

4. Learning in health and physical education is student-centred and skill-based. 
Learning in health and physical education should be directly connected to the needs and abilities of individual students. The curriculum expectations are age-related but not age-dependent – the readiness of students to learn will depend on their individual physical and emotional development. The learning in all strands is focused on individual skill development for healthy, active living, supported by knowledge of content and conceptual understanding. In order to reach their full potential, students need to receive progressive instruction and constructive feedback, as well as numerous opportunities to practise, reflect, and learn experientially in a safe environment.

5. Learning in health and physical education is balanced, integrated, and connected to real life. 
Health and physical education is balanced in that it addresses both the physical and cognitive needs of students. It also addresses their psychological and social needs. It is important for teachers to provide adequate time and resources for all aspects of the program, and not to allow any one aspect to be emphasized at the expense of others. Learning in health and physical education is integrated because the connections between the various elements of the program – active living, movement competence, healthy living, and living skills – are always recognized. Understanding these connections provides the foundation for health and physical literacy and for lifelong healthy, active living. Finally, health and physical education is highly relevant to students’ present and future lives in a rapidly changing world, and students need to understand this if they are to develop the comprehension, commitment, and capacity to participate in and promote healthy, active living.

FOUNDATIONS FOR A HEALTHY SCHOOL

Their learning in health and physical education helps students make informed decisions about all aspects of their health and encourages them to lead healthy, active lives. This learning is most authentic and effective when it occurs within the context of a “healthy”school. The implementation of the health and physical education curriculum is a significant component of a healthy school environment.

The Ministry of Education’s “Foundations for a Healthy School”(www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/ healthyschools/foundations.pdf) identifies four components that together represent a comprehensive approach to creating a healthy school. This approach ensures that students learn about healthy, active living in an environment that reinforces their learning through policies and programs that promote healthy, active living. The four components are as follows: 
• high-quality instruction and programs 
• a healthy physical environment 
• a supportive social environment 
• community partnerships

High-Quality Instruction and Programs

The implementation of the health and physical education curriculum provides students with a wide range of opportunities to learn, practise, and demonstrate knowledge and skills related to living a healthy and active life. Programs offered as a part of the curriculum often lay the foundation for students to engage in a more active lifestyle outside instructional time. In order to ensure high-quality health and physical education programs, it is important for teachers and school administrators to participate in focused professional learning opportunities.

A Healthy Physical Environment

The physical environment can affect both conditions for learning and opportunities for physical activity and healthy living. The physical environment includes the school building and grounds, routes to and from the school, and materials and equipment used in school programs. A healthy physical environment would include clean and accessible facilities, shade structures and a naturalized play environment, the availability of healthy food choices, and the absence of environmental carcinogens, including any that might be found in cleaning products. Visual cues, such as bulletin boards and signs with healthy-school messages, can be an indicator of a healthy physical environment. The design of the built environment can enhance or restrict opportunities for physical activity and healthy living.

A Supportive Social Environment

A supportive social environment has a positive impact on students’ learning. Students are more able and more motivated to do well and achieve their full potential in schools that have a positive school climate and in which they feel safe and supported. “School climate” may be defined as the sum total of all the personal relationships within a school. When these relationships are founded in mutual acceptance and inclusion and are modelled by all, a culture of respect becomes the norm. Students, teachers, and parents can all benefit from a supportive social environment, and there are various practices that can foster such an environment – from formal measures (e.g., school policies, programs, and guidelines that promote inclusion and the removal of systemic barriers; bullying prevention, healthy foods, and anaphylaxis protocols; clubs and organized support groups) to informal behaviour (e.g., occurring within unstructured peer interaction or free play).

Community Partnerships

School-community partnerships provide access to resources and services that can provide additional support to school staff, students, and families in the development and implementation of healthy school initiatives. Various organizations, including public health units, can collaborate with educators to deliver programs and services within the school setting.

Determinants of Health

The World Health Organization declared in 1948 that health is “a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity”. In 1998, Health Canada developed a list of factors and conditions that can have a significant influence on a person’s health. These “determinants of health”include income and social status, social support networks, education and literacy, employment and working conditions, physical and social environments, biology and genetic endowment, personal health practices and coping skills, healthy child development, availability and quality of health services, gender, culture, and other influencing factors. Together, these factors affect an individual’s overall state of physical, mental, social, emotional, and spiritual well-being. They influence not only whether a person stays healthy or becomes ill but also the extent to which the person possesses the physical, social, and personal resources needed to identify and achieve personal aspirations, satisfy needs, and cope with the environment. These factors also have an impact on student learning as a whole, and are strongly connected to learning in health and physical education. Although students have varying degrees of control over these factors, it is nevertheless important to be aware of them as contributing factors in student performance.

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Students

Students’ responsibilities with respect to their own learning develop gradually and increase over time, as they progress through elementary and secondary school. With appropriate instruction and with experience, students come to see how an applied effort can enhance learning and improve achievement. As they mature and develop their ability to persist, to manage their behaviour and impulses, to take responsible risks, and to listen with understanding, students become better able to take more responsibility for their learning and progress. Learning to take responsibility for their improvement and achievement is an important part of every student’s education.

Mastering the skills and concepts connected with learning in the health and physical education curriculum requires ongoing practice, an effort to respond to feedback, personal reflection, and commitment from students. It also requires a willingness to try new activities, work with peers, and always follow safety practices. Through ongoing practice and reflection about their development, students deepen their appreciation and understanding of themselves and others, and of their health and well-being.

Students’ attitudes towards health and physical education can have a significant effect on their learning and their achievement of the expectations. Students who are strongly engaged and who are given opportunities to provide leadership are more likely to adopt practices and behaviours that support healthy, active living.

With teacher support and encouragement, students learn that they can apply the skills they acquire in one subject to various other contexts and subjects. For example, they can apply the problem-solving skills they use in mathematics as they learn new skills in health and physical education, and they can apply various other critical and creative thinking processes that they develop in health and physical education to their study of dance, or to question historical interpretations, or to make connections between personal actions and environmental impacts. They can also apply the knowledge and skills they acquire in health and physical education to make better choices in all aspects of their lives. They can apply the understanding of movement that they acquire in health and physical education to other physical activities that they participate in at school, at home, and in the community, and they can apply their learning about healthy living to make healthier food choices, help with meal preparation, and make decisions about substance use, sexual health, and injury prevention.

Parents

Parents1 play an important role in their children’s learning. Studies show that students perform better in school if their parents are involved in their education. By becoming familiar with the health and physical education curriculum, parents can better appreciate what is being taught in each grade and what their children are expected to learn. This awareness will enhance parents’ ability to discuss their children’s work with them, to communicate with teachers, and to ask relevant questions about their children’s progress. Knowledge of the expectations will also help parents to understand how their children are progressing in school, to interpret teachers’ comments on student progress, and to work with teachers to improve their children’s learning.

1. In this document, parent(s) is used to refer to parent(s) and guardian(s).

Parents are the primary educators of their children with respect to learning about values, appropriate behaviour, and ethnocultural, spiritual, and personal beliefs and traditions, and they act as significant role models for their children. It is therefore important for schools and parents to work together to ensure that home and school provide a mutually supportive framework for young people’s education.

Effective ways in which parents can support their children’s learning include the following: attending parent-teacher interviews, participating in parent workshops and school council activities (including becoming a school council member), and encouraging their children to practise at home and to complete their assignments. Parents can be supportive by promoting and attending events related to healthy, active living at their children’s school. Many parents also have expertise in a range of disciplines that can contribute to a healthy school environment.

Parents who work in the health or recreation fields, for example, may be able to contribute as guest speakers or as volunteers during health or physical education classes or cocurricular activities.

Parents and all adult role models can also provide valuable support for their children’s learning by being physically active themselves and making healthy choices connected to eating, substance use, relationships, personal care, and injury prevention. Children who have opportunities to be physically active with the family are more likely to continue to be active as adults. Similarly, eating meals together as a family helps to reinforce healthy eating habits. By becoming involved in healthy, active living with their children, parents benefit as well.

Parents help to show children the value of their learning in health and physical education by taking an interest in the curriculum topics and helping to make connections at home and in the community as students apply their learning. Such an interest encourages students and promotes a positive attitude about healthy, active living. Through discussion with their children, parents have an opportunity to learn about new approaches in physical activity and about emerging health issues. Helping students apply their learning may involve things like including children when making food purchasing decisions and preparing meals, discussing activity choices and ways of building fitness into each day’s activities, and creating or facilitating activity opportunities.

By recognizing the achievements of their children in health and physical education, parents can help them develop confidence. The involvement of parents in their children’s education also gives parents an opportunity to promote the safety practices that children learn in the health and physical education program (e.g., wearing seatbelts and bicycle helmets, walking facing traffic, handling food safely, using sunscreen and protective clothing for UV protection).

For healthy growth and development, Canada’s Physical Activity Guide recommends that children and youth increase daily physical activity time and reduce sedentary time. While participation in sports and organized activities is beneficial, children need to know that sports are not the only way to be active. Organized sports are not available in all communities, and some children prefer to be active in other ways. Parents can encourage children to be active by providing opportunities for hiking, playing outside, cycling, walking, and involvement in gardening and household chores. Parents are also encouraged to give children opportunities to see and try new activities and to make use of community facilities such as parks, arenas, pools, and trails. Such opportunities help children build confidence and experience and develop their appreciation of being active.

Teachers

Teaching is key to student success. Teachers are responsible for using appropriate and effective instructional strategies to help students achieve the health and physical education curriculum expectations, as well as appropriate methods for assessing and evaluating student learning. Teachers bring enthusiasm, addressing individual students’ needs and ensuring high-quality learning opportunities for every student. The attitude with which teachers approach health and physical education is critical, as teachers are important role models for students.

Teaching health and physical education provides unique opportunities and challenges for teachers. Students in a gymnasium or outdoor setting demonstrate their learning in a very different way than in the classroom, and discussions related to health topics will be closely tied to students’ personal lives. These factors allow teachers to learn about their students in different ways and also require that the learning is structured in a way that protects the self-respect and promotes the well-being of all students.

Teachers should follow the principle of “first, do no harm”and ensure that the learning setting is always physically and emotionally safe. It is important to be aware of and carefully observe how students feel about various requirements of the program, from changing their clothing for physical education classes to participating in activities, demonstrating learning, working with others, and discussing health topics. To ensure physical safety, teachers must follow all board safety guidelines. It is also critical to student success to create an atmosphere in which students of all body shapes and sizes, abilities, gender identities and sexual orientations, and ethnocultural, racial, and religious backgrounds can feel accepted, comfortable, and free from harassment.

To increase their comfort level and their skill in teaching health and physical education and to ensure effective delivery of the curriculum, teachers should reflect on their own attitudes, biases, and values with respect to the topics they are teaching, and seek out current resources, mentors, and professional development and training opportunities, as necessary.

As a part of good teaching practice, teachers should inform parents about what their children are learning and when various topics are to be addressed. Such practices allow parents to work in partnership with the school, providing opportunities for discussion and follow-up at home and for reinforcing the student’s learning in a family context.

Using a variety of instructional, assessment, and evaluation strategies, teachers provide numerous opportunities for students to enhance their living skills as they develop the knowledge and skills required for active living, movement competence, and healthy living. These hands-on learning experiences should enable students to make meaningful connections between what they already know and what they are learning. Teachers should reflect on the results of the learning opportunities they provide, and make adjustments to them as necessary to help every student achieve the curriculum expectations to the best of his or her ability.

Learning in health and physical education can play a key role in shaping students’ views about life, relationships, healthy development, physical activity, and how they learn. Teachers can reinforce this learning in many different ways. They can integrate it with aspects of learning from other areas of the curriculum and make connections to healthyschool policies. They can provide praise and encouragement to help students achieve their personal goals. They can remind students of the need to practise in order to improve skills and of the need to be active on a daily basis to develop the habit of physical activity and improve fitness, and they can provide students with opportunities to do these things within instructional time. They can also help students learn about careers in various areas of health, wellness, sport, fitness, outdoor and environmental studies, and recreation. By using all of these strategies, teachers can help students develop a positive attitude towards health and physical education, and support their understanding of the role of healthy active living concepts in their lives. Teachers can help students see connections between what they learn and their ability to make important decisions related to various aspects of their health and well-being, and they can remind students of the importance of thinking carefully about decisions that could have a major impact on all parts of their lives – physical, emotional, social, mental, and spiritual.

Teachers provide students with frequent opportunities to communicate, practise, and apply health and physical education concepts and, through regular and varied assessment, give them the specific, descriptive feedback they need in order to further develop and refine their learning. By assigning tasks that promote the development of critical and creative thinking skills, teachers also enable students to become thoughtful and effective communicators. Opportunities to relate knowledge and skills in health and physical education learning to wider contexts – across the curriculum, within the context of a healthy school, and in the world beyond the school – motivate students to learn and to become lifelong learners.

Principals

The principal works in partnership with teachers and parents to ensure that each student has access to the best possible educational experience. The principal is a community builder who creates a healthy and safe school environment that is welcoming to all, and who ensures that all members of the school community are well informed. Principals can provide support for the successful implementation of the health and physical education curriculum by emphasizing the importance of this curriculum within the framework of a healthy school. They can consider establishing a healthy-school committee, consisting of staff, students, and parents, to provide support for healthy-school initiatives. Encouraging a positive and proactive attitude towards healthy, active living is key to success. To support student learning, principals ensure that the Ontario curriculum is being properly implemented in all classrooms through the use of a variety of instructional approaches, and that appropriate time and resources are made available for teachers to allow all students to participate fully in the health and physical education program. To enhance teaching and student learning in all subjects, including health and physical education, principals promote learning teams and work with teachers to facilitate teacher participation in professional development activities. Principals are also responsible for ensuring that every student who has an Individual Education Plan (IEP) is receiving the modifications and/or accommodations described in his or her plan – in other words, for ensuring that the IEP is properly developed, implemented, and monitored.

The principal is responsible for ensuring that all students, including students with special education needs, have the opportunity to participate in health and physical education in a safe manner. It is the principal’s responsibility to ensure that adequate time for health and physical education is included in each day’s timetable and that students have an opportunity for daily physical activity.2 Timetables should have sufficient flexibility to allow the use of some same-sex and some coeducational groupings for curriculum delivery where appropriate or needed.

2. See the description of daily physical activity under “Strand A– Active Living”on page 21.

The expectations in the health and physical education curriculum can be met in a variety of settings and using a broad range of equipment. Ensuring that teachers have the support, resources, and equipment they need to deliver a high-quality program is essential. Additional teacher support to ensure student safety and to increase teachers’ knowledge, awareness, and comfort level may be required. Principals can provide this support by working with the school board and community partners, including public health units, and by supporting professional learning networks and mentoring within the school community. Principals play an essential leadership role in supporting teacher learning through sharing resources and expertise and in furthering the use of creative approaches, the integration of learning across the curriculum, and the nurturing of partnerships within the school system and with other members of the broader community.

Community Partners

Community partners are an important resource for a school’s health and physical education program. Relationships with public health units, community recreation facilities, social service agencies, universities and colleges, businesses, service groups, and other community organizations can provide valuable support and enrichment for student learning. These organizations can provide expertise, skills, materials, and programs that are not available through the school or that supplement those that are. Such partnerships benefit not only the students but also the life of the community.

Public health units are one of the most valuable sources of support in the community for health and physical education programs, as they can provide health expertise in a number of areas that are relevant to the curriculum. Local health unit staff are involved in work on initiatives such as childhood immunization, oral health, safe food handling, reproductive and sexual health, the prevention of chronic diseases (e.g., through tobacco control or promotion of healthy eating), the promotion of physical activity, the prevention of injury, and the control of infectious diseases.

The Ontario Public Health Standards (2008) require public health professionals to work with school boards and schools, using a comprehensive health promotion approach to influence the development and implementation of health policies and the creation or enhancement of supportive environments to address the following topics: healthy eating, healthy weights, comprehensive tobacco control, physical activity, alcohol, and exposure to ultraviolet radiation. Public health units are also required to conduct oral health screening and maintain immunization records of students and are directed to work with schools as community partners to address other issues important for child and youth health. Public health practitioners can, for example, work with teachers, administrators, students, and parents to assess the health priorities and needs of the school and participate in developing and supporting plans to foster healthy activities, programs, or policies within the school environment. Similarly, schools may find it profitable to collaborate with community recreation specialists to provide students with additional physical activity opportunities before and after school that are consistent with the health and physical education curriculum. School boards can collaborate with leaders of existing community-based programs for youth, including programs offered in recreation facilities and community centres. Arenas, sporting venues, outdoor education sites (where available), local hiking trails, and community gardens provide rich learning environments for field trips and for exploration of the local community and its resources. Teachers may also find opportunities for their students to participate in community projects or events such as a community run/walk/wheel event or a health promotion fair.

Nurturing partnerships with other schools and between school boards can be a valuable way of applying learning within the context of a healthy school community. Neighbouring schools and boards may share resources or facilities when developing and sharing professional development opportunities for staff, and they can collaborate in creating systems for healthy, active living (such as active and safe routes to school) or in developing special events such as community fairs, information evenings, and sports events. From time to time, opportunities may present themselves for schools and school boards to work with local researchers to complete studies that will help educators make informed decisions based on solid evidence, local needs, and current best practices.

Partnerships should be sought with organizations that have up-to-date information and use evidence-based practices. In choosing community partners, schools should build on existing links with their local communities and create new partnerships in conjunction with ministry and school board policies. These links are especially beneficial when they have direct connections to the curriculum. Schools should ensure that partnership initiatives are carried out within the context of strong educational objectives. Partnership events should support the units or sequence of instruction, have clear criteria, be designed for educational purposes, and provide descriptive feedback.

THE PROGRAM IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

CURRICULUM EXPECTATIONS

The Ontario Curriculum, Grades 1–8: Health and Physical Education, 2009 identifies the expectations for each grade and describes the knowledge and skills that students are expected to acquire, demonstrate, and apply in their class work and activities, on tests, in demonstrations, and in various other activities on which their achievement is assessed and evaluated.

Two sets of expectations are listed for each grade in each strand, or broad area of the curriculum, in health and physical education for Grades 1 to 8 – overall expectations and specific expectations.

The overall expectations describe in general terms the knowledge and skills that students are expected to demonstrate by the end of each grade. The specific expectations describe the expected knowledge and skills in greater detail. The specific expectations are organized under numbered subheadings, each of which indicates the overall expectation to which the group of specific expectations corresponds. Taken together, the overall and specific expectations represent the mandated curriculum.

In health and physical education, the overall expectations outline the types of skills and concepts that are required for healthy, active living at any age or stage of development. For this reason, the overall expectations are repeated in constant terms from grade to grade. The health and physical education curriculum focuses on developing, reinforcing, and refining the students’ knowledge and skills associated with each of these key overall expectations over time. This approach reflects and accommodates the progressive nature of skill development in health and physical education.

The specific expectations reflect this progression in knowledge and skill development from grade to grade through (1) changes in the wordings of expectations, where appropriate; (2) the examples that are given in parentheses in the expectation; and/or (3) the teacher prompts and student responses that follow most expectations. The progression is captured by the increasing complexity of requirements reflected in the examples and prompts and by the increasing specificity of relationships and equipment used, the diversity of contexts in which the learning is applied, and the variety of opportunities described for applying it. It should be noted that all the skills specified in the early grades continue to be developed and refined as students move up through the grades, whether or not each of those skills continues to be explicitly required in an expectation.

Specific Expectations, Examples, and Teacher Prompts

As noted above, specific expectations are organized into groups (sometimes referred to as “subgroups”or “suborganizers”), each associated with an overall expectation. This organization is not meant to imply that the expectations in any one group are achieved independently of the expectations in the other groups. The numbered headings are used merely to help teachers focus on particular aspects of knowledge and skills as they develop various lessons and learning activities for their students. (In this document, the Healthy Living strand uses additional subheadings within each group of expectations to identify the health topics addressed through individual expectations.)

Most of the specific expectations are accompanied by examples, given in parentheses, as well as “teacher prompts”, usually followed by possible student responses. (It is important to note that the student responses are provided only to indicate the content and scope of intended learning. They are not written in language that represents the typical parlance or vocabulary of students at the given grade.)

The examples and prompts help to clarify the requirements specified in the expectations and suggest the intended depth and level of complexity of the expectations. They have been developed to model appropriate practice for the grade and are meant to serve as illustrations for teachers. Teachers can choose to use the examples and teacher prompts that are appropriate for their students, or they may develop their own approaches that reflect a similar level of complexity. Whatever the specific ways in which the requirements outlined in the expectations are implemented in the classroom, they must, wherever possible, be inclusive and reflect the diversity of the student population and the population of the province.

Notes on the Presentation of Elements Related to the Specific Expectations

Specific Expectations. Each specific expectation in this document, together with its teacher prompts and student responses, is followed by a solid line running across the width of the page, to separate it from the next expectation.

Teacher Prompts and Student Responses. The teacher prompts are often followed by student responses, which are introduced by the word “student”(or “students”, where more than one possible student response is included). Where several prompts relate to the same topic or aspect of the expectation, the prompts and responses are presented as a dialogue. In many instances, several such dialogues, each focusing on a different topic or aspect of the expectation, are provided. The dialogues are separated by a set of five centred dots.

In some instances, several possible student responses are given for a single teacher prompt. The responses are then run on in the same paragraph, and each response is contained in its own set of quotation marks.

The diagram on page 17 is omitted and shows all of the elements to be found on a page of curriculum expectations. Text only:

Expectations in health and physical education are organized into three strands, numbered A, B, and C.

The overall expectations describe in general terms the knowledge and skills students are expected to demonstrate by the end of each grade. Two or more overall expectations are provided for each strand in every grade. The numbering of overall expectations indicates the strand to which they belong (e.g., A1–A3 are the overall expectations for strand A).

A numbered subheading identifies each group of specific expectations and relates to one particular overall expectation (e.g., “A1. Active Participation” relates to overall expectation A1).

The specific expectations describe the expected knowledge and skills in greater detail. The expectation number identifies the strand to which the expectation belongs and the overall expectation to which it relates (e.g., A1.1, A1.2, A1.3, and so on, relate to the first overall expectation in strand A).

Teacher prompts and student responses are included for most expectations to help clarify the requirements and suggest the intended depth and level of complexity of the expectations. These are illustrations only, not requirements.

The examples help to clarify the requirement specified in the expectation and to suggest its intended depth and level of complexity. The examples are illustrations only, not requirements. They appear in parentheses and are set in italics.

Living skill abbreviations are given in square brackets after specific expectations that are clearly connected to the skills indicated.

THE STRANDS AND THE LIVING SKILL EXPECTATIONS IN THE HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM

The expectations for health and physical education are organized into three distinct but related strands – Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living. Integral to expectations in all these strands is a further set of expectations, presented at the start of each grade. These are the living skills – the personal, interpersonal, and critical and creative thinking skills that are essential to the achievement of expectations in the three strands. The living skill expectations are to be taught and evaluated in conjunction with learning in each of the strands; they cannot be addressed in isolation. They make the learning in health and physical education personally relevant to students, as students learn to apply them in a variety of contexts that relate to their everyday lives.

The following chart shows the flow of learning through the curriculum and the interrelationships among its various components. This organizational structure continues from the elementary curriculum into the Healthy Active Living Education courses in Grades 9 to 12.

Table on page 18 is omitted, text only

Health and Physical Education: Strands, Subgroups, and Living Skills

Living Skills Personal Skills [PS] 
• Self-awareness and self-monitoring skills 
• Adaptive, management, and coping skills

Interpersonal Skills [IS]
• Communication skills
• Relationship and social skills

Critical and Creative Thinking [CT]
• Planning
• Processing
• Drawing conclusions/presenting results
• Reflecting/evaluating

Strand A: Active Living
A1. Active Participation
• Regular participation, variety, lifelong activity
• Enjoyment, motivation

A2. Physical Fitness
• Fitness development through daily physical activity, personal fitness plans

A3. Safety 
• Personal safety and safety of others during physical activity

Strand B: Movement Competence: Skills, Concepts, Strategies
B1. Movement Skills and Concepts
• Movement skills – stability, locomotion, manipulation
• Movement concepts – body awareness, effort, spatial awareness, relationships
• Movement principles

B2. Movement Strategies
• Components of physical activities
• Strategies and tactics in all physical activities

Strand C: Healthy Living

C1. Understanding Health Concepts
• Understanding the factors that contribute to healthy growth and development

C2. Making Healthy Choices
• Applying health knowledge, making decisions about personal health and well-being

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living
• Making connections to link personal health and wellbeing to others and the world around them 

Expectations in the Healthy Living strand focus on the following four health topics. Positive behaviours in relation to each topic area contribute to overall mental health and emotional well-being.

Mental Health and Emotional Well-being
Healthy Eating
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
Growth and Development (1998) (See p. 33)

End of Table

The Living Skill Expectations

The living skill expectations identify learning that helps students develop a positive sense of self, develop and maintain healthy relationships, and use critical and creative thinking processes as they set goals, make decisions, and solve problems. Living skills are an important aspect of students’ overall healthy development, and their application is essential to the achievement of many of the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands. Living skills cannot be taught effectively in isolation; they must be taught and evaluated in conjunction with learning related to all strands of the curriculum, in order to make the learning personally relevant for students. As they develop and apply their living skills, students will build resilience. They will learn to make choices that protect their safety and health and enable them to become independent thinkers and responsible adults who are capable of developing strong relationships and who are committed to lifelong healthy, active living.

The health and physical education program provides a unique setting for developing the living skills that will help students gain a better understanding of who they are and help them connect positively and productively with the larger world. The integration of the living skills with the other components of the health and physical education curriculum from Grade 1 to Grade 12 gives students an opportunity to develop, practise, and refine these important skills as they mature.

The living skill expectations are the same for all grades. There is a single overall expectation and three groups of related expectations, one for each area of learning: Personal Skills, Interpersonal Skills, and Critical and Creative Thinking. The progression of learning from grade to grade is indicated in the examples, which highlight how the living skills are integrated with learning in the three strands of the curriculum and how they are applied in a developmentally appropriate way. The context and application of the learning changes as students develop and mature, from Grade 1 to Grade 12.

To further highlight the connection between the living skills and the expectations in each of the strands, abbreviations for one or more of the three categories of skills (PS for personal skills, IS for interpersonal skills, and CT for critical and creative thinking) are given in square brackets after the specific expectations, to indicate which area of living skills is most applicable to the learning in that expectation. For example, when “[PS]”appears after an expectation, it indicates that, with achievement of the expectation, a student can also develop personal skills relevant to that learning. Teachers should help students make these connections where appropriate to ensure that they are given productive opportunities to develop the living skills as they work to achieve the curriculum expectations. Students’ application of the living skills must be assessed and evaluated as a part of their achievement of the overall expectations in each of the strands for every grade.

A detailed outline of the component elements of the living skills is provided in the chart on page 20 for teachers’ reference, and detailed discussions of each category of skills are provided in the following sections.

Table from page 20 is omitted, text only

Living Skills
Self-awareness and Self monitoring Skills
• Developing a realistic understanding of their own strengths and areas that need improvement
• Monitoring their progress in developing skills and understanding
• Recognizing stress and learning to identify its causes

• Taking responsibility for their actions and for their learning

Adaptive, Coping, and Management Skills
• Using adaptive skills, such as being flexible, making connections, and applying problem-solving, stress-management, and conflict resolution
skills, when confronted with challenges and change

• Using coping skills, such as relaxation techniques, adopting an optimistic attitude, trying out solutions to problems, expressing emotions,
and seeking help, when dealing with difficult or stressful situations or emotions

• Using time-management and organizational skills to develop greater control over their own lives

Interpersonal Skills

Communication Skills (verbal/non-verbal)
• Receiving information – observing non-verbal signals and body language; active listening, including paraphrasing, clarifying, questioning, responding
• Interpreting information – reflecting on messages, analysing messages 
• Sending information – signalling intentions; clearly expressing information and ideas; expressing responses and providing feedback; using persuasive skills, assertive skills, negotiating skills, refusal skills

Relationship and Social Skills
• Showing respect for others and the environment 
• Appreciating differences in people
• Demonstrating fair play
• Demonstrating teamwork skills by working collaboratively with a partner or in a group to achieve a common goal
• Applying conflict-resolution skills
• Networking
• Showing leadership

Critical and Creative Thinking

Planning
• Generating information/ideas
• Organizing information/ideas
• Focusing and clarifying ideas or strategies

Processing
• Interpreting, making connections, analysing
• Synthesizing
• Evaluating

Drawing Conclusions/Presenting Results
• Arriving at a decision, conclusion, goal, or solution
• Presenting results (e.g., orally, in writing, through a demonstration or performance)
• Sharing the strategy

Reflecting/Evaluating
• Reflecting on what could have been done differently
• Transferring learning to new situations
• Planning next steps

End of Table

Personal Skills

Personal skills help students understand themselves better and equip them to deal with life’s challenges. The health and physical education program provides students with many opportunities to develop these skills as they discover and develop new physical capabilities and acquire knowledge and explore ideas that have deep personal relevance.

Through the development of self-awareness and self-monitoring skills, students build a sense of “being”. They learn to understand their capabilities and strengths and to take responsibility for their learning and their actions. Through the acquisition of adaptive, coping, and management skills, students develop their capacity to respond to difficulties and to develop greater control over their lives. All of these skills build resilience – the ability to protect and maintain one’s mental health and emotional well-being while responding to the stresses and challenges of life.

Learning personal skills helps to develop an understanding of the factors that contribute to resilience and a positive self-concept. It also includes learning about the importance of a positive disposition and a forward-thinking outlook. Although students are not evaluated

Living Skills Personal Skills Interpersonal Skills Critical and Creative Thinking on their disposition and outlook, they are taught to be aware of and to manage their feelings. Learning the power of a positive attitude, learning to make connections between feelings and actions or between their personal strengths and the activities that they choose to do, for example, and developing the skills to respond to challenges and changes are all part of developing personal skills.

Interpersonal Skills

As they participate in physical activities and healthy living discussions, students interact with each other in many ways and have numerous opportunities to develop interpersonal skills. These are the relationship and social skills and the verbal and non-verbal communications skills that students need in order to interact positively with others, collaborate effectively in groups, and build healthy relationships. They are critical to interactions in everyday life, and they help students develop a sense of belonging as they learn to find their own place in the world

Critical and Creative Thinking

The ability to think critically and creatively will help students make healthier choices in all aspects of their lives. The health and physical education program gives students many opportunities to develop higher order thinking skills, to explore without fear of making mistakes, and to learn from their mistakes. Students will be able to apply these skills in many ways – to solving problems, resolving conflicts, making decisions, and setting goals. By helping students achieve personal goals and aspirations, these skills contribute to a sense of “becoming”– a sense of personal growth.

In a variety of situations, students will learn to use their critical thinking skills to develop a plan and, within that context, to generate and organize information and ideas, then focus and clarify those ideas. They will learn and practise using a process to analyse, synthesize, and evaluate ideas and information. When they have arrived at a decision, goal, or solution, they will have opportunities to present the information in a variety of ways. Finally, students will learn to reflect on and evaluate the entire process, thinking about what went well, what could have been done differently, and what should be done next.

Strand A– Active Living

The Active Living strand helps students develop the skills and knowledge needed to participate regularly and safely in physical activity, while enjoying being physically active and learning how to develop and enhance their own personal fitness. Learning through physical activity helps to enhance students’ physical literacy. Daily physical activity (DPA)3 is one important component of this strand. Participating in daily moderate to vigorous physical activity helps to build a habit of activity that becomes a part of each student’s routine and way of life.

The three subgroups within this strand, corresponding to the three overall expectations, are Active Participation, Physical Fitness, and Safety, with living skill expectations integrated as appropriate.

Active Participation

Participation in physical activity provides students with a variety of opportunities for increasing their self-esteem and self-confidence and developing positive interpersonal skills and attitudes, including practices of fair play and respect for others. All students, individually and in groups, should be strongly encouraged to participate daily in a wide variety of physical activities, such as dance, games, sports, fitness, individual, and recreational activities, and to become increasingly responsible for their own daily physical activity. By participating in a wide range of physical activities, they will learn what activities they enjoy most and what factors contribute to their success in participating in physical activities. This understanding can help them develop and sustain a commitment to healthy, active living throughout their lives.

Physical Fitness

The learning within this subgroup of expectations emphasizes health-related fitness – the physical and physiological components of fitness that have a direct impact on health and well-being. Health-related components of fitness include cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, and flexibility.

Daily physical activity (DPA) is a mandatory component of daily instruction for students in Ontario and is included as a curriculum expectation in health and physical education for every grade within this section of the strand. This learning expectation requires students to actively engage in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, including appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes every day. All students, including students with special education needs, are required to have the opportunity to participate in DPA during instructional time. The goal of daily physical activity is to instil the habit of activity and enable all elementary students to be active on a daily basis in order to maintain or enhance their physical fitness, their overall health and wellness, and their ability and readiness to learn.

Through experiential learning, students gain an understanding of the importance of regular physical activity and its relationship to developing and maintaining health-related fitness. Students learn not only what to do to develop personal fitness but also why to do it and how to do it appropriately and effectively. Students are provided with a variety of opportunities to develop their health-related fitness, especially their cardiorespiratory endurance. As levels of fitness improve, the duration of vigorous activity can be regularly increased. In addition, students will be involved in assessing their own health-related fitness levels, setting goals, and developing personal fitness plans to achieve their goals.

Throughout this strand, as well as the Movement Competence strand, students will have opportunities to develop their skill-related fitness. Skill-related components of fitness include balance, co-ordination, agility, speed, power, and reaction time. These components are important for developing the quality of movements during activity.

Safety

Safety, including physical and emotional safety, is an integral part of the health and physical education curriculum. Although teachers have responsibility for following board safety guidelines in matters related to supervision, clothing and footwear, equipment, and facilities, and for applying special rules and instructions, students must also begin to take responsibility from a very young age for their own safety and the safety of others around them at school, at home, and in the community. Following procedures, using equipment as instructed, wearing appropriate attire, and using thinking skills to assess risk and take appropriate precautions are some ways in which students can contribute to their own safety and the safety of others while participating in physical activity. Students must fulfil each expectation safely and responsibly without putting themselves and others at risk. See the Appendix for a quick-reference summary of learning in the Active Living strand.

Strand B– Movement Competence: Skills, Concepts, and Strategies

The Movement Competence strand helps students develop the movement competence needed to participate in physical activities through the development of movement skills and the related application of movement concepts and movement strategies. As students develop their confidence and competence, they will be developing their physical literacy. Students are also introduced to movement principles in developmentally appropriate ways. These principles are indicated in the expectations through examples and teacher prompts that illustrate how skills can be applied at different ages and stages. The students learn kinesthetically in this strand, as in the Active Living strand, and have regular opportunities in every grade to develop and practise their personal movement skills.

The development of fundamental movement skills in association with the application of movement concepts and principles provides the basic foundation for physical literacy. An understanding of fundamental skills and concepts is essential both to an individual’s development of effective motor skills and to the application of these skills in a wide variety of physical activities. Because the development of movement skills is age-related but not age-dependent and because students’ skill levels depend on a variety of factors, including their experiences outside of school, the opportunities they have for practice, their rate of growth and maturation, and their abilities and interests, the range of skills in a typical class will vary widely. Consequently, it is very important to provide choice and flexibility within activities and to ensure that learning experiences are designed to reflect individual students’ developmental levels and adapted to suit learners of all abilities. Modifications should be made as needed to allow students to develop and work towards their own personal level of movement competence.

Since the development of movement skills can also enhance students’ interpersonal, cognitive, and emotional development, it is critical that the health and physical education program be inclusive, fully engaging all students irrespective of gender, background, or ability. Without the development of fundamental skills, many children and youth choose to withdraw from activity due to fear of failure, self-consciousness, or lack of ability to move efficiently. Learning fundamental movement skills and applying movement concepts and principles helps students increase their comfort, confidence, competence, and proficiency with movement, thereby increasing their rates of overall physical activity and improving their health. When fun and enjoyment are part of skill development and physical activity, students are more likely to develop positive attitudes towards lifelong healthy, active living.

The focus of the learning in this strand is on transferable skills. The goal is to have students understand how skills, concepts, and strategies learned in one activity can apply to other activities. For example, the fundamental skill of throwing an object overhand can be transferred to a tennis serve or a badminton smash. Similarly, general transferable movement skills that apply to the three phases of movement – preparation, execution, and follow-through – can be applied to a variety of physical activities. By understanding how to apply their learning to other activities and situations, students will be better equipped to enjoy and participate in a wide variety of physical activities throughout their lives. 

As students grow and develop, the focus of learning related to movement skills and associated concepts and movement strategies shifts. When students are younger or less experienced, the emphasis is on developing basic skills and applying them in situations involving the use of simple strategies and tactics. When students are more mature and experienced, more time can be spent on the application of skills in games and activities involving more complex strategies and tactics. The concepts are clearly connected at every level, but the focus of learning is different at different ages and stages. The Movement Competence expectations are organized into two subgroups: Movement Skills and Concepts, and Movement Strategies. Living skills are integrated as appropriate into each.

Table from page 24 is omitted, text only

Movement skills and concepts + Movement strategies = MOVEMENT COMPETENCE

What/How
Movement skills and concepts

Skills
• Stability with static balance, in which the body remains in place but moves around its horizontal or vertical axis, and stability with dynamic balance, in which core strength is used to maintain balance and control of the body while moving through space (e.g., bending, stretching, twisting, turning, rolling, balancing, transferring weight, curling up, landing from a jump)

• Locomotion or travelling skills, used to move the body from one point to another (e.g., walking, wheeling, running, skip ping, hopping, galloping, chasing, dodging)

• Manipulation skills, which involve giving force to objects or receiving force from objects when sending, receiving, or retaining objects (e.g., throwing, catching, trapping, collecting, kicking, punting, dribbling, carrying, volleying, striking)

Concepts
• Body awareness – What parts of the body move, and in what way? Awareness of body parts, shape, actions (e.g., wide, narrow, twisted, symmetrical, curled, stretched)

• Spatial awareness – Where does the body move? (e.g., location, direction, level, pathway, plane, extensions) 

• Effort awareness – How does the body move? (e.g., fast or slow, with strong or light force, bound or free)

• Relationship – With whom or with what does the body move? (e.g., with people or objects, or in a particular environment)

Movement Principles
• Centre of gravity: Stability increases as the centre of gravity becomes lower, the base of support becomes larger, the line of gravity moves nearer to the centre of the base of support, and the mass becomes greater.

• Laws of motion and force

• Summation of joints: The production of maximum force requires the use of all the joints that can be used.

• Maximum velocity: The production of maximum velocity requires the use of joints in order, from largest to smallest.

• Applied impulse: The greater the applied impulse, the greater the increase in velocity.

• Law of reaction: Movement usually occurs in the direction opposite that of the applied force.

Why/When
Movement strategies

Activity Appreciation
Learning about game or activity structures, rules, and skills through participation in activities, modified as necessary

Tactical Awareness
Developing understanding of the principles of play or participation common to similar activities

Decision Making
Learning to make decisions about what to do and how to do it in different situations

Application of Skills
Developing understanding of what skills are required to improve proficiency and how to apply those skills while participating in activities

Performance
Demonstrating skills, techniques, and tactics in activities or demonstrations

End of Table

Movement Skills and Concepts 

Movement skills must be explicitly taught; they are not acquired simply through activities of various sorts. However, these skills should not be taught in isolation from the context in which they will be applied. Instead, they should be taught in a way that shows how they will be used within and across a variety of physical activities, so that students can apply and transfer their skills to specific activities, such as games, gymnastic and dance sequences, and fitness, individual, or recreational activities. 

When students are learning or developing a skill, they need opportunities for practice and feedback. Students learn most effectively when they have opportunities to problem solve and play an active role in their learning. As they develop and work towards consolidating their skills, they will be able to combine skills and apply them to more complex activities and games. Mature movement skills do not result from physical maturation alone; rather, they must be continually refined and combined with other movement skills in a variety of physical activities. It is important that teachers facilitate the learning of movement skills and concepts through a progression of age-appropriate activities. 

Research into motor development indicates that learners acquire new fundamental movement skills (motor skills) most successfully during the preschool and elementary years, when most children’s neurological pathways are developing rapidly and are receptive to the development of fundamental movement patterns and basic skills. When young children enter school, their movements are often awkward and lacking in fluidity. In the early school years, they gain necessary coordination and control over their movements as they are presented with opportunities to learn and practise. They can then refine, extend, and apply these patterns to more complex skills during later childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Movement competence requires the development of fundamental movement skills and the application of movement concepts and principles. 

Movement Skills. 

The fundamental movement skills relate to stability, locomotion, and manipulation: 

Stability skills include stability with static balance, in which the body maintains a desired shape in a stationary position, and stability with dynamic balance, in which students use core strength to maintain balance and control of the body while moving through space (e.g., bending, stretching, twisting, turning, rolling, balancing, transferring weight, curling, landing from a jump). 

Locomotion or travelling skills are those used to move the body from one point to another in various ways (e.g., walking, wheeling, running, skipping, hopping, galloping, chasing, dodging, sliding, rolling, jumping, leaping). 

Manipulation skills involve giving force to objects or receiving force from objects as one sends, receives, or retains objects (e.g., sending: throwing, kicking, punting, striking, volleying; receiving: catching, trapping, collecting; retaining: carrying, dribbling, cradling).

Movement principles can be introduced in simple, age-appropriate ways to help students improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their movements. Application of these principles becomes more refined as movement competence improves. Some movement principles include:

Centre of gravity: Stability increases as the centre of gravity becomes lower, the base of support becomes larger, the line of gravity moves nearer to the centre of the base of support, and the mass becomes greater. (For example, a static balance will be most stable when it forms a wide shape, is low to the ground, and has many widely spread contact points on the ground.)

Laws of motion and force

Summation of joints: The production of maximum force requires the use of all the joints that can be used. (For example, when throwing a ball, begin by bending the knees and then incorporate the full body, and not just the arm, in the throwing motion.) Maximum velocity: The production of maximum velocity requires the use of joints in order, from largest to smallest. (For example, when jumping, start by pushing off with the large muscles in the legs and then stretch the fingers and toes in the air after pushing off.)

Applied impulse: The greater the applied impulse, the greater the increase in velocity (For example, the harder a swing is pushed, the higher it will rise. A ball that is struck harder will go farther and faster.)

Law of reaction: Movement usually occurs in the direction opposite that of the applied force. (For example, on a teeter-totter, pushing up on one side causes the other side to go down and vice versa. When swimming, pushing the water behind causes the body to move forward. When jumping, pushing down causes the body to move up.)

Movement Strategies

When participating in an activity, students will have an ultimate goal or objective. To accomplish that goal, students may choose from a number of strategies that are similar within particular categories of games and physical activities. The actions that students do in order to accomplish the strategy are called tactics. For example, members of a soccer team might adopt the strategy of maintaining possession of the ball as much as possible in order to increase their scoring chances and decrease those of their opponent. Tactics that students might use to implement the strategy could include spreading out in the playing area in order to be open to receive a pass, passing the ball often among teammates, and moving towards the goal when looking for open spaces. A student who is learning to juggle and wants to be able to juggle three balls for over a minute without dropping them might use a strategy of working on developing a consistent toss. Tactics to accomplish this might include practising with scarves, which move more slowly, before trying to juggle with balls, practising with one ball then two, practising just the throw and letting the balls drop until the toss is consistent, working on having the balls peak at the same place with each toss, and working on keeping eye contact on the balls at the peak of the toss.

Graphic on page 27 is omitted, text only

Goal or Objective
3 different Strategies: 2 differents tactics for each strategy

end of Graphic

The ability to devise and apply strategies and tactics requires an understanding of how games and activities are structured and how they work. This in turn requires an understanding of the components and other features that characterize individual games and activities. Games can be grouped into broad categories on the basis of common features and similarities, and students can learn how to transfer strategies, tactics, and skills from one game or activity to another in the same category. In so doing, they acquire game literacy and extend their competence to a much wider range of activities. By encouraging students to think strategically, to analyse game and activity structures, and to make connections between different games and game components, the movement strategy expectations give them an opportunity to exercise their critical and creative thinking skills, build confidence, and increase their ability to participate successfully in a wide range of games and other activities.

The chart below shows one way of categorizing games and activities on the basis of similarities and common features.

chart on page 28 is omitted, text only

Categories and Common Features of Games and Activities

Target Activities: 
Activity Category - Description
• emphasize accuracy and control

• challenge can be modified by changing target size and distance and equipment, by using stationary or mobile targets, and by having the layers send objects while stationary or mobile

• can be played individually or in small teams

Activity Category - Examples
Target Activities: bocce, bowling curling, disc golf, lawn bowling, shuffleboard, wheelchair bocce 

Net/Wall Activities
Activity Category - Description
• involve moving and striking an object and hitting it within a specified space
• players work to make it difficult for opponents to send the object back to the wall or across the net
• small numbers of players are usually involved

Activity Category - Examples
Net/Wall Activities: badminton, sepak takraw, squash, table tennis, tennis, volleyball, wheelchair tennis


Activity Category - Description
Striking/Fielding Activities
• can involve running, striking, batting, throwing, kicking, and catching
• runners hit, kick, or throw an object, then score runs by running to designated areas
• fielders retrieve the object and get it to a specified place to stop runs from being scored and to get opponents out

Activity Category - Examples
Striking/Fielding Activities: baseball, beep baseball, cricket, kick-ball, rounders, softball, t-ball

Activity Category - Description
Territory Activities
• involve controlling an object, keeping it away from opponents, and moving it into a position to score on a target

• can be modified to be simple running games or to use a specified skill (kicking, throwing)

• games are challenging because of the continuous action and decisionmaking needed to switch between offensive and defensive roles, the numbers of people involved, and the movement in the playing area

Activity Category - Examples
Territory Activities: basketball, football, goal ball, handball, hockey, lacrosse, rugby, sledge hockey,soccer, tchoukball, Ultimate, water polo, wheelchair basketball

End of Chart

In each category, the interrelationship of rules, strategies, and skills defines the game structure. Target games have the simplest structure because they tend to be played by individuals or small groups and have breaks in the play which allow time for decision making. This does not mean that target activities are the simplest games to play, as the skills and strategies involved can be very complex. Territory games have the most complex structure because the number of players, the amount of movement in the play area, and the almost continuous action increase the number of variables in these games. Within each category, however, there is room for a wide range of skills and abilities and the games can be played at varying levels of complexity. This makes it possible for students of all age and ability levels to explore activities within all game categories.

To promote lifelong healthy, active living for all, it is important not to restrict students to game and sport activities. Many students prefer activities that do not involve team play, and these can provide ample opportunities for enjoyment and the development of fitness and movement skills related to control of body rhythm, movement aesthetics, creativity, sequencing, composition, and stability. Examples of individual and recreational activities include the following:

• endurance activities (e.g., long distance running or wheeling, swimming, power walking, orienteering) aquatics (e.g., swimming, synchronized swimming, aqua-fit) 
• dance (traditional, modern, folk, First Nation, Inuit, and Métis dance; ballet; jazz; hip hop) 
• resistance and strength activities (e.g., weight lifting, wrestling, ball training, yoga, Pilates, exercise bands, wall climbing, rope course activities) 
• gymnastics and movement activities (e.g., artistic, rhythmic, educational gymnastics; t’ai chi; qigong)
• outdoor activities (e.g., cycling, rowing, hiking, downhill and cross-country skiing, biathlon, triathlon, mountain biking, skating, kayaking, canoeing, sledding) 
• track and field (short and long-distance running events; jumping events – high jump, long jump, triple jump; throwing events such as shot put)

To accommodate different developmental levels and abilities and to maximize participation, it is desirable to give students an opportunity to learn and apply skills within the context of a modified game or activity. Teaching Games for Understanding (TGfU) is a particularly useful child-centred approach of this kind. Through developmentally appropriate sequencing of activities that are representative of a variety of game elements, students learn to apply increasingly complex skills and strategies. The learning connected to movement strategies gives students opportunities to experience versions of activities that are appropriate to their age and abilities, so that they can recognize the basic concepts in the games or activities, appreciate their challenges and rules, understand their tactical aspects, and identify movement skills and concepts that they can apply to many other games and physical activities. This experiential approach gives responsibility to the teacher to act as facilitator and to maximize participation and fun by making adaptations that optimize the level of challenge for all participants and by giving students opportunities to make their own adaptations to the activities. Teachers are encouraged to use open-ended questions to help students explore, discover, create, and experiment with movement and tactical solutions. Because of its focus on student autonomy, critical thinking, and learning, this approach gives students valuable preparation for lifelong participation in physical activities.

See the Appendix for a quick-reference summary of learning in the Movement Competence strand.

Strand C– Healthy Living

The Healthy Living strand helps students develop an understanding of the factors that contribute to healthy development, a sense of personal responsibility for lifelong health, and a respect for their own health in relation to others and the world around them. Students will develop health literacy as they acquire the knowledge and skills they need to develop, maintain, and enjoy healthy lifestyles as well as to solve problems, make decisions, and set goals that are directly related to their personal health and well-being. Learning how to establish, monitor, and maintain healthy relationships is a key part of this strand.

The focus of the learning in this strand is not merely on health knowledge but rather on higher-level thinking connected to the application of skills for healthy living. Students are learning about health broadly as a resource for living. The emphasis is on why they are learning about healthy living and on what they need to understand about growing and healthy development in order to make informed personal choices and take responsibility for their health now and for the rest of their lives. They are also encouraged to make connections beyond themselves to understand how their health is connected with that of others and is affected by factors in the world around them.

Current thinking views health as a holistic phenomenon, and students are therefore encouraged to make connections between various aspects of their well-being, including physical, mental, emotional, spiritual, and social aspects. Health professionals also recognize that an emphasis on health promotion will pay greater dividends over the long run than an emphasis on disease treatment alone. For that reason there is a significant stress in the curriculum on learning about the connections between healthy choices, active living, and chronic disease prevention.

Living skills are also tightly linked to this strand. Because students in elementary school are still developing their sense of self, learning to interact positively with others, and learning to make connections with the broader world, it is important that they acquire strategies for coping, adapting, and managing, for communicating and relating positively to others, and for thinking critically and creatively when making life choices and responding to the world around them. The learning in this strand provides many opportunities for students to learn how to limit risk and to build the protective factors that will increase their resilience as they confront life’s challenges (see “protective factors”, “resilience”, and “risk factors” in the glossary).

The healthy living framework provides an opportunity for learning about different health topics, which can be reinforced from different perspectives and with different foci as students learn and grow, thus providing opportunities for recursive learning at different ages and stages. Students are encouraged to make connections between concepts in different content areas. If, for example, students learn refusal strategies when choosing not to smoke, they can learn to apply those same strategies when making choices about taking care of their bodies or choices connected to substance use, sexual health, physical activities, and personal safety.

The specific expectations are organized around three overall expectations, which are based on the application of health knowledge, and are cross-referenced to four health content areas, as shown in the chart on page 31 (as well as in the complete Grade 1–8 learning summary chart in the Appendix). This organization provides teachers with the option of using either a “vertical learning”approach, in which the overall expectations are the central organizing element and specific health content is linked to them, or a “horizontal learning” approach, in which instruction is organized around the health content areas but still captures the application emphasis of the overall expectations.

Some topics within the Healthy Living strand can be challenging to teach because of their personal nature and their connection to family, religious, or cultural values. These topics can include but are not limited to topics covered in the Growth and Development section of the 1998 curriculum, as well as topics such as mental health, body image, substance abuse, violence, harassment, child abuse, gender identity, sexual orientation, illness (including HIV/AIDS), and poverty. These topics must be addressed with sensitivity and care. It is important that both teachers and learners have a comfort level with these topics so that information can be discussed openly, honestly, and in an atmosphere of mutual respect.

When addressing all topics, but especially ones that can be challenging to talk about, it is important to give students an opportunity to explore all sides of the issue to promote understanding. Facts need to be projected objectively and students given the information they need to make informed decisions. Topics that can be challenging to talk about are best taught through discussion rather than direct instruction. It is important to set ground rules so that the discussion takes place within a setting that is accepting, inclusive, and respectful of all.

Graphic from page 31 is omitted

Health Topics

The health content in this strand is divided into four content areas: healthy eating; personal safety and injury prevention; substance use, addictions, and related behaviours; and the Growth and Development component of the 1998 curriculum. These topics have been chosen because they are fundamentally connected to students’ daily lives. Concepts tied to mental health and emotional well-being are woven throughout all content areas across all grades.

Healthy Eating. This component of the Healthy Living strand equips students with the knowledge and skills they need to make healthy eating choices. Students learn to examine their own food choices and eating patterns and then make decisions and set appropriate goals, while working within parameters that they can control. Major topics include Canada’s Food Guide (and specialized versions of it, such as Eating Well with Canada’s Food Guide: First Nations, Inuit and Métis), nutrition, food choices, factors influencing eating habits, skills for healthy eating, food trends, oral and dental health, food systems, and connections between eating choices, chronic disease prevention, and the health of the environment.

The learning in this topic area emphasizes the importance of student involvement in making food choices and preparing meals and snacks. The objective is to encourage students to develop a sense of personal responsibility for taking care of themselves and making healthy food decisions. Hands-on experiences with food help students make real connections between what they learn in the classroom and their own lives. This topic also provides a point of contact with healthy school policies relating to food.

Connections to the home are important. Students bring their learning home to their families, and they have variable amounts of control over the food they eat at home and the food they bring to school. Teachers need to consider these realities and be aware of issues such as poverty, food allergies and sensitivities, and cultural practices in order to ensure that the learning is presented with sensitivity. Using a flexible and balanced approach and avoiding rigidity regarding food rules and guidelines can reduce potential triggers to body image and eating concerns. Sensitivity regarding weight and shape and personal values regarding “what is healthy”are important when considering instruction. What can always be stressed, however, is that healthy eating and regular physical activity are essential requirements for maintaining good health over the long term.

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention. Learning in this content area is intended not only to reduce children’s injuries but also to equip them to recognize, assess, and control potentially dangerous situations. Personal safety topics focus on developing skills to identify, prevent, and resolve issues in areas such as bullying, peer assault, child abuse, harassment, and violence in relationships. Injury prevention topics focus on areas such as road safety (including pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle safety), seasonal safety rules, sun protection, home safety, fire safety, safety when volunteering and working, and first aid.

The expectations address the knowledge and skills needed to reduce safety risks at home, at school, and in the community. Risk taking is a natural and important part of maturation for students, especially adolescents. Having the confidence to take risks is essential to enjoying and achieving in both learning and life. Having the ability to manage risk, however, is essential to an individual’s physical safety and mental and emotional well-being. To develop their risk management skills, students will engage in skill-building activities and thoughtful discussion about ways to minimize harm in real-life situations.

Students will also become familiar with the support available to them within their families as well as through agencies and services that provide support and help within the community. However, knowledge alone is not enough: students require the skills necessary to respond appropriately to situations that threaten their personal safety and well-being. Living skills such as self-advocacy, conflict resolution, anger management, and decisionmaking skills, as well as the ability to use assertiveness, resistance, and refusal techniques, will help them respond safely and effectively to these situations.

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours. Education is critical to the prevention of drug abuse. Parents, guardians, educators, and society in general all have key roles to play in educating students about drug use, misuse, and abuse.

Alcohol and tobacco are the drugs most readily available to Ontario students, and smoking is the primary cause of preventable illnesses, disabilities, and premature deaths in Canada. The learning expectations related to substance use and abuse respond to these facts by focusing on an understanding of the effects of drugs – prescription drugs, non-prescription drugs, illicit drugs, tobacco, and alcohol – and the consequences of their use. This knowledge is integrated with the development of a variety of living skills that help students make and maintain healthy choices.

This strand also addresses addictions and related behaviours that can lead to addictions or compulsive behaviour, such as online gambling, excessive screen time, or self-harm. It includes discussion of the relationship between substance use and abuse and mental health disorders such as anxiety, depression, and eating disorders. Students are made aware of support systems that can help them find healthy, substance-free alternatives for coping with stressful situations.

Growth and Development (1998). The Growth and Development expectations from the 1998 health and physical education curriculum have been included in this interim edition of the document pending further consultation on the expectations related to human development and sexual health that will be included in the final revised curriculum. The extract below, from the 1998 curriculum document, provides context for the Growth and Development expectations:

Growth and development education is more than simply teaching young people about the anatomy and physiology of reproduction. For example, growth and development education focuses on an understanding of sexuality in its broadest context – sexual development, reproductive health, interpersonal relationships, affection, abstinence, body image, and gender roles. Acquiring information and skills and developing attitudes, beliefs, and values related to identity and relationships are lifelong processes. 

Parents and guardians are the primary educators of their children. As children grow and develop relationships with family members and others, they learn about appropriate behaviours and values, as well as about sexuality. They are influenced by parents, friends, relatives, religious leaders, teachers, and neighbours, as well as by television, radio, videos, movies, books, advertisements, music, and newspapers. School-based programs add another important dimension to a child’s ongoing learning about sexuality. 

The overall and specific expectations in this strand are age-appropriate and should be addressed with sensitivity and respect for individual differences. Because of the sensitive nature of these topics, parents or guardians must be informed about the content of the curriculum and time of delivery. Teachers and learners must develop a comfort level with these topics so that information can be discussed openly, honestly, and in an atmosphere of mutual respect. The “healthy sexuality” expectations should be addressed only after teachers have developed rapport with their students. Opportunities should be provided for segregated as well as coeducational instruction.

Integration of Mental Health

Mental health concepts are included within all content areas of the Healthy Living strand. The focus is on promoting and maintaining mental health, building an understanding of mental illness, and reducing stigma and stereotypes. Mental health and emotional well-being involve the healthy balance of all aspects of life – physical, intellectual, social, emotional, and spiritual. A person with good mental health is able to think, feel, act, and interact in a way that permits him or her to enjoy life while being able to cope with challenges that arise. Mental health is connected to how we think about and appraise ourselves, our lives, and the people we know and care about. It involves our ability to make realistic sense of the world around us and to react meaningfully to it.

Positive mental health and emotional well-being are closely related to the development of psychological and emotional resilience. Resilience involves being able to recover from difficulties or change – to function as well as before and then move forward. It is often referred to as the ability to “bounce back”from difficulties or challenges. Resilience is promoted by healthy lifestyles, but it also depends on many other things. Our lives are affected by a variety of individual characteristics, family circumstances, and community and environmental factors, some of which increase our resilience by protecting us from emotional and psychological harm and some of which reduce it by exposing us to emotional and psychological risks.

Behaviours that promote mental health are not always correlated with the prevention of mental illness, which can also have a biological component. However, learning about mental health and emotional well-being helps students understand and manage the risk and protective factors that are in their control so that they will be better able to build and maintain positive mental health. 

See the Appendix for a quick-reference summary of learning in the Healthy Living strand.

ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION OF STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT

BASIC CONSIDERATIONS

The primary purpose of assessment and evaluation is to improve student learning. Information gathered through assessment helps teachers to determine students’ strengths and weaknesses in their achievement of the curriculum expectations in each subject in each grade. This information also serves to guide teachers in adapting curriculum and instructional approaches to students’ needs and in assessing the overall effectiveness of programs and classroom practices.

Assessment is the process of gathering information from a variety of sources (including assignments, day-to-day observations, conversations or conferences, demonstrations, projects, performances, and tests) that accurately reflects how well a student is achieving the curriculum expectations in a subject. As part of assessment, teachers provide students with descriptive feedback that guides their efforts towards improvement. Evaluation refers to the process of judging the quality of student work on the basis of established criteria, and assigning a value to represent that quality. In Ontario elementary schools, the value assigned will be in the form of a letter grade for Grades 1 to 6 and a percentage grade for Grades 7 and 8.

Assessment and evaluation will be based on the provincial curriculum expectations and the achievement levels outlined in this document.

In order to ensure that assessment and evaluation are valid and reliable, and that they lead to the improvement of student learning, teachers must use assessment and evaluation strategies that: 
• address both what students learn and how well they learn; 
• are based both on the categories of knowledge and skills and on the achievement level descriptions given in the achievement chart on pages 38–39; 
• are varied in nature, administered over a period of time, and designed to provide opportunities for students to demonstrate the full range of their learning; 
• are appropriate for the learning activities used, the purposes of instruction, and the needs and experiences of the students; 
• are fair to all students; 
• accommodate students with special education needs, consistent with the strategies outlined in their Individual Education Plan; 
• accommodate the needs of students who are learning the language of instruction; 
• ensure that each student is given clear directions for improvement; 
• promote students’ ability to assess their own learning and to set specific goals; 
• include the use of samples of students’ work that provide evidence of their achievement; 
• are communicated clearly to students and parents at the beginning of the school year and at other appropriate points throughout the school year.

Evaluation of Achievement of Overall Expectations

All curriculum expectations must be accounted for in instruction, but evaluation focuses on students’ achievement of the overall expectations. A student’s achievement of the overall expectations is evaluated on the basis of his or her achievement of related specific expectations. The overall expectations are broad in nature, and the specific expectations define the particular content or scope of the knowledge and skills referred to in the overall expectations. Teachers will use their professional judgement to determine which specific expectations should be used to evaluate achievement of the overall expectations, and which ones will be covered in instruction and assessment (e.g., through direct observation) but not necessarily evaluated.

Levels of Achievement

The characteristics given in the achievement chart (pages 38–39) for level 3 represent the “provincial standard”for achievement of the expectations. A complete picture of achievement at level 3 in health and physical education can be constructed by reading from top to bottom in the shaded column of the achievement chart, headed “Level 3”. Parents of students achieving at level 3 can be confident that their children will be prepared for work in the next grade.

Level 1 identifies achievement that falls much below the provincial standard, while still reflecting a passing grade. Level 2 identifies achievement that approaches the standard. Level 4 identifies achievement that surpasses the standard. It should be noted that achievement at level 4 does not mean that the student has achieved expectations beyond those specified for a particular grade. It indicates that the student has achieved all or almost all of the expectations for that grade, and that he or she demonstrates the ability to use the knowledge and skills specified for that grade in more sophisticated ways than a student achieving at level 3.

THE ACHIEVEMENT CHART FOR HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

The achievement chart that follows identifies four categories of knowledge and skills in health and physical education. The achievement chart is a standard province-wide guide to be used by teachers. It enables teachers to make judgements about student work that are based on clear performance standards and on a body of evidence collected over time.

The achievement chart is designed to:

• provide a framework that encompasses all curriculum expectations for all grades and subjects represented in this document; 
• guide the development of assessment tasks and tools (including rubrics); 
• help teachers to plan instruction for learning; assist teachers in providing meaningful feedback to students; 
• provide various categories and criteria with which to assess and evaluate student learning.

Categories of Knowledge and Skills

The categories, defined by clear criteria, represent four broad areas of knowledge and skills within which the subject expectations for any given grade are organized. The four categories should be considered as interrelated, reflecting the wholeness and interconnectedness of learning.

The categories of knowledge and skills are described as follows:

Knowledge and Understanding. Subject-specific content acquired in each grade (knowledge), and the comprehension of its meaning and significance (understanding).
Thinking. The use of critical and creative thinking skills and/or processes.
Communication. The conveying of meaning through various forms.
Application. The use of knowledge and skills to make connections within and between various contexts.

Teachers will ensure that student work is assessed and/or evaluated in a balanced manner with respect to the four categories, and that achievement of particular expectations is considered within the appropriate categories.

Criteria

Within each category in the achievement chart, criteria are provided, which are subsets of the knowledge and skills that define each category. The criteria for each category are listed below:

Knowledge and Understanding

• knowledge of content (e.g., facts, definitions, skills, principles and strategies, safe practices and procedures) 
• understanding of content (e.g., processes, techniques, ideas, relationships between concepts)

Thinking

• use of planning skills (e.g., identifying the problem, formulating questions and ideas, gathering and organizing information; developing fitness plans; selecting strategies) 
• use of processing skills (e.g., synthesizing information, evaluating risk and determining appropriate safety measures, revising fitness goals, detecting bias) 
• use of critical/creative thinking processes (e.g., goal setting, decision making, problem solving; analysing movement skills, strategizing, reflecting on learning and determining steps for improvement, critiquing)

Communication

• expression and organization of ideas and information in oral, visual, and/or written forms (e.g., demonstrations, role plays, conferences, presentations, posters, pamphlets, journals) 
• communication for different audiences (e.g., peers, teammates, adults) and purposes (e.g., to inform, instruct, promote) and in oral, visual, and/or written forms 
• use of health and physical education conventions, vocabulary, and terminology (e.g., using and interpreting signals and body language; using correct terminology to discuss parts of the body, health-related components of fitness, phases of movement [preparation, execution, follow-through]) in oral, visual and/or written forms

Application

• application of knowledge and skills (e.g., movement skills, concepts, principles, strategies; training principles; health concepts; safe practices; personal and interpersonal skills, including teamwork, fair play, etiquette, leadership) in familiar contexts (e.g., physical activities, healthy living discussions) 
• transfer of knowledge and skills to new contexts (e.g., transfer of movement skills, strategies, and tactics from a familiar physical activity to a new activity, transfer of planning skills to contexts such as fitness, healthy eating, healthy sexuality) 
• making connections within and between various contexts (e.g., between active participation, learning in the health and physical education program, and healthy, active living; between health and physical education, other subjects, and personal experiences in and beyond school)

Descriptors

A “descriptor”indicates the characteristic of the student’s performance, with respect to a particular criterion, on which assessment or evaluation is focused. In the achievement chart, effectiveness is the descriptor used for each criterion in the Thinking, Communication, and Application categories. What constitutes effectiveness in any given performance task will vary with the particular criterion being considered. Assessment of effectiveness may therefore focus on a quality such as appropriateness, clarity, accuracy, precision, logic, relevance, significance, fluency, flexibility, depth, or breadth, as appropriate for the particular criterion. For example, in the Thinking category, assessment of effectiveness might focus on the degree of relevance or depth apparent in an analysis; in the Communication category, on clarity of expression or logical organization of information and ideas; or in the Application category, on appropriateness or breadth in the making of connections. Similarly, in the Knowledge and Understanding category, assessment of knowledge might focus on accuracy, and assessment of understanding might focus on the depth of an explanation. Descriptors help teachers to focus their assessment and evaluation on specific knowledge and skills for each category and criterion, and help students to better understand exactly what is being assessed and evaluated.

Qualifiers

A specific “qualifier”is used to define each of the four levels of achievement – that is, limited for level 1, some for level 2, considerable for level 3, and a high degree or thorough for level 4. A qualifier is used along with a descriptor to produce a description of performance at a particular level. For example, the description of a student’s performance at level 3 with respect to the first criterion in the Thinking category would be: “The student uses planning skills with considerable effectiveness”. The descriptions of the levels of achievement given in the chart should be used to identify the level at which the student has achieved the expectations. Students should be provided with numerous and varied opportunities to demonstrate the full extent of their achievement of the curriculum expectations, across all four categories of knowledge and skills.

ACHIEVEMENT CHART – HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION, GRADES 1–8
Table from page 38 and 39 is omitted, text only

Categories
Knowledge and Understanding – Subject-specific content acquired in each grade (knowledge), and the comprehension of its meaning and significance (understanding)

Knowledge of content (e.g., facts, definitions, skills, principles and strategies, safe practices and procedures)
The student:
Level 1: demonstrates limited knowledge of content
Level 2: demonstrates some knowledge of content 
Level 3: demonstrates considerable knowledge of content
Level 4: demonstrates thorough knowledge of content

Understanding of content (e.g., processes, techniques, ideas, relationships between concepts)
Level 1: demonstrates limited understanding of content
Level 2: demonstrates some understanding of content
Level 3: demonstrates considerable understanding of content
Level 4: demonstrates thorough understanding of content

Thinking – The use of critical and creative thinking skills and/or processes
The student:

Use of planning skills (e.g., identifying the problem, formulating questions and ideas, gathering and organizing information; developing fitness plans; selecting strategies)
Level 1: uses planning skills with limited effectiveness
Level 2: uses planning skills with some effectiveness
Level 3: uses planning skills with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: uses planning skills with a high degree of effectiveness

Use of processing skills (e.g., synthesizing information, evaluating risk and determining appropriate safety measures, revising fitness goals, detecting bias)
Level 1: uses processing skills with limited effectiveness
Level 2: uses processing skills with some effectiveness
Level 3: uses processing skills with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: uses processing skills with a high degree of effectiveness

Use of critical/creative thinking processes (e.g., goal setting, decision making, problem solving; analysing movement skills, strategizing, reflecting on learning and determining steps for improvement, critiquing)
Level 1: uses critical/creative thinking processes with limited effectiveness 
Level 2: uses critical/creative thinking processes with some effectiveness
Level 3: uses critical/creative thinking processes with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: uses critical/creative thinking processes with a high degree of effectiveness

Communication – The conveying of meaning through various forms
The student:

Expression and organization of ideas and information in oral, visual, and/or written forms (e.g., demonstrations, role plays, conferences, presentations, posters, pamphlets, journals)
Level 1: expresses and organizes ideas and information with limited effectiveness
Level 2: expresses and organizes ideas and information with some effectiveness
Level 3: expresses and organizes ideas and information with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: expresses and organizes ideas and information with a high degree of effectiveness

Communication for different audiences (e.g., peers, teammates, adults) and purposes (e.g., to inform, instruct, promote) and in oral, visual, and/or written forms
Level 1: communicates for different audiences and purposes with limited effectiveness
Level 2: communicates for different audiences and purposes with some effectiveness
Level 3: communicates for different audiences and purposes with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: communicates for different audiences and purposes with a high degree of effectiveness

Use of health and physical education conventions, vocabulary, and terminology (e.g., using and interpreting signals and body language; using correct terminology to discuss parts of the body, health-related components of fitness, phases of movement [preparation, execution, follow-through]) in oral, visual and/or written forms 
Level 1: uses conventions, vocabulary, and terminology with limited effectiveness
Level 2: uses conventions, vocabulary, and terminology with some effectiveness 
Level 3: uses conventions, vocabulary, and terminology with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: uses conventions, vocabulary, and terminology with a high degree of effectiveness

Application – The use of knowledge and skills to make connections within and between various contexts
The student:

Application of knowledge and skills (e.g., movement skills, concepts, principles, strategies; training principles; health concepts; safe practices; personal and interpersonal skills, including teamwork, fair play, etiquette, leadership) in familiar contexts (e.g., physical activities, healthy living discussions)
Level 1: applies knowledge and skills in familiar contexts with limited effectiveness
Level 2: applies knowledge and skills in familiar contexts with some effectiveness
Level 3: applies knowledge and skills in familiar contexts with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: applies knowledge and skills in familiar contexts with a high degree of effectiveness

Transfer of knowledge and skills to new contexts (e.g., transfer of movement skills, strategies, and tactics from a familiar physical activity to a new activity, transfer of planning skills to contexts such as fitness, healthy eating, healthy sexuality)
Level 1: transfers knowledge and skills to new contexts with limited effectiveness
Level 2: transfers knowledge and skills to new contexts with some effectiveness
Level 3: transfers knowledge and skills to new contexts with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: transfers knowledge and skills to new contexts with a high degree of effectiveness

Making connections within and between various contexts (e.g., between active participation, learning in the health and physical education program, and healthy, active living; between health and physical education, other subjects, and personal experiences in and beyond school)
Level 1: makes connections within and between various contexts with limited effectiveness
Level 2: makes connections within and between various contexts with some effectiveness
Level 3: makes connections within and between various contexts with considerable effectiveness
Level 4: makes connections within and between various contexts with a high degree of effectiveness

End of Table

SOME CONSIDERATIONS FOR PROGRAM PLANNING IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

When planning a program in health and physical education, teachers must take into account considerations in a number of important areas, including those discussed below.

INSTRUCTIONAL APPROACHES AND TEACHING STRATEGIES

Effective Lesson Design in All Subjects of the Ontario Curriculum

When designing lessons, effective teachers consider what they want students to learn, how they will know if students are learning, and how they will respond to students who are not making progress.

As they determine what students will learn, teachers identify the broad ideas associated with the overall expectations, consider the context and the vehicle for learning, and identify and discuss learning goals with their students. Involving students in the process of identifying and clarifying learning goals helps make their learning more personally relevant and thus enhances their engagement with it.

As they look for evidence that students are learning, teachers consider not only what students have learned but also how they are learning. With this information, they can adjust instructional approaches to meet individual students’ needs more effectively. It is also important to consider the most appropriate points at which to gather this information and the most appropriate assessment strategies, including guiding questions.

Finally, when determining how to respond to students who are not making progress, teachers think about the most effective ways to activate those students’ prior learning, and provide a context that will help engage them in the lesson. Teachers provide the support students need by reviewing and helping them understand the learning goals, and by scaffolding instruction to provide intensive support for struggling students. Teachers then monitor students’ achievement of learning goals and provide additional instructional support as needed. Students learn best when instruction and assessment are both differentiated according to their needs, and when approaches and groupings of students best suited to the population of the class are used.

Effective Instruction in Health and Physical Education

Effective instruction is key to student success. In health and physical education, instruction is effective if it motivates students and instils positive habits of mind, such as a willingness and determination to explore and persist, to think and to question, to communicate clearly, and to take responsible risks. To be effective, instruction must be based on the belief that all students can be successful and that learning in health and physical education is critical for all students.

To provide effective instruction, teachers need to know their students – to be aware of their readiness to learn, understand their interests, and recognize their learning styles and preferences. An understanding of students’ strengths and needs, their backgrounds, and their abilities can help teachers plan effectively for instruction and assessment. As teachers come to understand their students, they can respond to individual students’ needs by effectively differentiating the learning approaches and materials they use, the ways in which they encourage students to demonstrate their learning, and the learning environment itself.

Teaching approaches should be informed by the findings of current research related to health and physical education. For example, research has provided evidence of the benefits of experiential learning and constructivist teaching, which emphasize the role of the teacher as co-learner and facilitator, promote authentic experiential learning and learning through inquiry, provide engagement through student-initiated work, create a sense of community through teamwork and collaboration, and provide options to accommodate different learning styles and intelligences. A well-planned program should provide activities at individual students’ level of readiness but should also push students towards their optimal level of challenge for learning, providing support through shared and guided practice and gradually withdrawing support as the student achieves greater levels of independence in learning. It is important to have a balanced program that provides for both direct instruction in content and skills and opportunities for students to use their knowledge and skills in structured as well as unstructured activities.

Effective teaching approaches promote the development of higher-order thinking skills. Teachers should encourage students to think critically and creatively about what they are learning, their own health-related choices, and how they are learning. They should support students in developing the language and techniques they need to assess their own learning.

Students learn best by doing. Many of the skills emphasized in this curriculum are best taught and learned through participatory exploration experiences and hands-on activities, with numerous opportunities to practise and apply new learning. Learning by doing and group activities also enable students to develop personal and interpersonal skills as they acquire the knowledge, skills, and habits that will lay the foundation for lifelong healthy, active living. Through regular and varied assessments, teachers can give students the detailed feedback they need to further develop and refine their skills.

Students should have opportunities to participate in a wide range of activities and to complete assignments that not only help them master health and physical education concepts, but also enable them to develop inquiry and research skills and provide opportunities for self-expression and personal choice. Activities should be based on the assessment of students’ individual needs, proven learning theory, and best teaching practices. Effective activities enable both direct teaching and modelling of knowledge and skills and the application of learning strategies that encourage students to express their thinking and that engage them in their learning. 

To be effective, instruction in health and physical education must be developmentally appropriate. Many of the expectations in the health and physical education curriculum are similar from grade to grade, to provide students with the numerous opportunities they need to explore the basic concepts and skills underlying these expectations in a wide variety of age-appropriate ways. Although all students go through predictable stages of motor development, differences in rates of maturation and in the kinds of opportunities they have had to practise motor skills contribute to significant variability in their skills and abilities. As noted earlier, development of motor skills is age-related, not age-dependent. This is a subtle but important distinction that underscores the need for differentiated instruction and assessment. As they develop, students also pass through a number of cognitive and social/emotional developmental stages, which are described in some detail in the overviews provided in this document for Grades 1–3, 4–6, and 7–8. To meet the needs of all students at different stages of development, effective teachers provide exposure to a wide range of activities, instruction on skill progressions, opportunities for focused practice, and detailed and supportive feedback and encouragement. 

Instruction based on the fundamental principles of health and physical education (see p. 6) provides the framework for a well-planned, inclusive, high-quality health and physical education program. The following questions may be helpful for teachers as they reflect on their implementation of each of the fundamental principles:

1. School, Family, and Community Support 
• Are the key messages of the health and physical education program reflected in the school’s physical and social environment, policies and programs, and community partnerships? Do adults in the school act as role models?

2. Physical Activity as the Vehicle for Learning 
• Are students given frequent and varied opportunities to be active and engaged? Do all students have opportunities to build their fitness and develop the habit of regular physical activity by participating in moderate to vigorous physical activity every day? Do students have opportunities to take part in kinesthetic experiences that help them learn about their bodies and experience the joy of movement? Do students have numerous opportunities to improve their skills through practice and physical exploration?

3. Physical and Emotional Safety 
• Is instruction designed to ensure a positive experience in a safe environment for all students? Are all school board safety guidelines being followed? Are activities being modified as required to ensure that all students are included? Is exercise presented as a positive and healthy experience rather than being used as punishment? Does the program restrict activities in which students may be eliminated from play, and thereby deprived of opportunities to participate, practise, and improve? Are teams designated in ways that are inclusive and fair, avoiding potentially insensitive methods of selection (e.g., having teams chosen by student captains)? Are students’ diverse backgrounds taken into account when health topics are introduced, to ensure that discussions have personal relevance and that topics are addressed with sensitivity?

4. Student-Centred, Skill-Based Learning 
• Are program activities and instruction differentiated to provide all students with relevant and engaging learning experiences, so that all students can experience success? Are the activities adaptable to meet diverse individual needs and abilities? Are instructions clear and succinct and delivered at intervals throughout the lesson, in order to allow for maximum activity and learning? Are modified and small-group activities used often, to allow for maximum participation? Are students given opportunities to make choices and to adapt the boundaries and level of challenge of activities, the type of equipment used, group sizes, and other features, as well as to choose topics for discussion? Are students actively involved in discussing and clarifying criteria for learning? Are questioning techniques being used to reveal meaning and to encourage student engagement in, reflection about, and sense of responsibility for learning?

5. Balanced, Integrated Learning With Relevance to Students’ Lives 
• Are individual students experiencing the optimal degree of challenge in their learning, with tasks that are not too difficult and not too easy? Does the program integrate learning in health education and learning in physical education, in a way that helps students understand that both are essential for healthy, active living? Are a variety of activities presented throughout the year and over the course of a student’s experience in the program? Does instruction make use of real-life examples, field trips, and communication with parents, community members, and elders so that students’ learning in health and physical education is reflected and reinforced in both home and community environments?

Planning and Scheduling Instruction

High-quality instruction in health and physical education is integrated in such a way that students have opportunities to make connections between concepts and skills in all three strands of the curriculum and in the living skill expectations.

Planning of the health education component of the curriculum requires careful consideration of when material should be taught explicitly and when topics and concepts can be integrated with learning in physical education and linked to learning in other subjects. Teaching health sporadically or when gymnasium facilities are being used for other purposes will not provide adequate opportunities for learning. Thirty per cent of instructional time should be allocated to health education. Ways of managing instruction will vary from school to school, depending on student needs, timetabling, and available facilities. If more than one teacher is responsible for teaching different parts of the health and physical education curriculum, communication and collaboration between these teachers for instructional planning, evaluation, and reporting is essential.

The living skills should serve as a linking mechanism between instruction in health education and physical education. Some healthy living topics can be taught through physical education and can also be connected to learning in other curriculum areas.

The physical education component of the curriculum should include a balance of games, dance, movement education, outdoor and recreational activities, and opportunities to focus on developing fitness. A mix of individual and group activities, as well as of traditional and new games and activities, provides opportunities for students to think critically and apply movement skills and concepts in different ways. Careful school-wide planning helps to ensure that students experience different kinds of activities in the different grades, with activities in each grade serving as the vehicle for broader learning connected with movement skills, concepts, and strategies, active living, fitness, and safety.

Daily physical activity (DPA) is a requisite part of a comprehensive health and physical education program. It can be incorporated into the instructional day in a variety of ways – one being the inclusion of twenty minutes or more of moderate to vigorous physical activity during a scheduled health and physical education class. However, since physical activity is only one component of a complete health and physical education program, there may be the occasional day when a health and physical education class does not include twenty minutes of sustained physical activity. On these days (or on days when a health and physical education class is not scheduled), other opportunities for DPA must be provided. Physical activity can be integrated into other curriculum areas in a variety of ways, many of which are outlined in the ministry’s Daily Physical Activity documents for Grades 1–3, 4–6, and 7 and 8 (available at www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/healthyschools/dpa.html).

Planning the Use of Facilities and Equipment

When planning the use of facilities and equipment, teachers should organize the learning environment in a way that allows for movement and ensures student comfort and safety. It is important to plan routines that students can follow as they move to and from the gymnasium or activity space, make transitions from one activity to another, and collect and put away equipment. Planning time and creating guidelines for changing clothes, using equipment, and other procedures can maximize student comfort and participation. In the classroom, teachers should strive to create a space that is comfortable and stimulating and that allows for flexible groupings for student discussion and activities. Displaying student work connected to healthy living discussions can help students make connections with learning in other subjects at school and with their lives outside school.

Since equipment and facilities in individual schools across the province will vary, care has been taken to ensure that the expectations this curriculum can be met in a variety of settings and using a broad range of equipment. The curriculum contains a wide assortment of examples and prompts that illustrate different ways of meeting the expectations. Teachers can use these as a source of ideas for adapting the delivery of the expectations to meet the particular needs of their students. When making decisions about equipment and facilities, teachers should ensure that they are distributed in a way that provides fair and equal access for all students, taking into account criteria such as gender and range of abilities, and that allows for a variety of activities and choice in activities. The principles and guidelines of Universal Design for Learning (see p. 49) should also be considered when planning the use of equipment and facilities, so that the needs of all students, including those with special education needs, can be met.

It is important to note that activities that help students fulfil the curriculum requirements, including daily physical activity, do not necessarily require the use of a school gymnasium. The scheduling and accommodation of regular physical education classes, however, may require some creativity, especially if facilities are limited and must be shared by large numbers of students. Classes may be combined if there is sufficient space to permit students to participate safely, and hallways, portables, and outdoor spaces can also be put to use. It may be possible as well to use alternative venues, such as nearby parks, fields, and recreation centres. The use of these various settings will have the advantage of increasing students’ awareness of the facilities that are available in their communities.

To support the development of specific skills and add interest to physical activities, a variety of equipment should be used. For example, an activity that focuses on students’ catching objects of various sizes and shapes is more effective if it uses a variety of objects, such as beanbags, tennis balls, beach balls, rubber chickens, and discs. When supplies are limited, teachers will have to be resourceful to ensure that each student has opportunities to use as many different kinds of equipment as possible. Teachers must provide specific instruction to students on the appropriate handling of equipment, ensure that equipment is in good repair and suitably organized, and take into account the size and age of the students when choosing the most appropriate equipment to use.

Coeducational and Same-Sex Classes

Although all the curriculum expectations can be achieved in either coeducational or samesex classes, addressing parts of the curriculum in same-sex settings may allow students to learn and ask questions with greater comfort. Same-sex settings may be of benefit to students not only for the discussion of some health topics, but also for developing and practising some physical skills. Such considerations are particularly relevant in the case of adolescent learners.

It is also important to have time for coeducational learning, which can encourage learning about others, and about differences and commonalities among people, and allows for the development of relationship skills. Teachers should base their decisions about teaching in coeducational or same-sex settings on students’ needs. Different strategies may be required at different times, so that students have opportunities to learn in a variety of different groupings.

Acknowledgement of and respect for individual differences regardless of sex will encourage student participation and help students learn to collaborate with and respect others. Strategies for encouraging understanding and mutual respect among students include: creating an inclusive and welcoming atmosphere in the class; providing opportunities for both male and female students to assume leadership roles; encouraging and respecting the interests and abilities of both sexes; ensuring that responsibilities are shared equally by male and female students; expecting all students to be equally active participants.

Co-curricular programs

Within the context of a healthy school, the health and physical education curriculum provides all students with the skills and strategies they need to participate in a wide variety of physical activities. A supportive school environment will provide opportunities for students to continue their learning either in the school, at home, or in the community. Intramural programs allow all students to participate in activities that are informal and not highly competitive. Interschool programs offer students opportunities to participate in more organized and competitive activities. Other recreational activities and clubs also provide opportunities for students with common interests to participate in physical activities in non-competitive settings. In planning and organizing the health and physical education curriculum, schools should use community organizations, facilities, and programs as resources to provide students with additional experiences and opportunities for physical activity and healthy living.

SAFETY IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Teachers must model safe practices at all times and communicate safety requirements to students in accordance with school board and ministry policies.

Teachers are responsible for ensuring the safety of students during classroom activities and also for encouraging and motivating students to assume responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others. Teachers should follow board safety guidelines to ensure that students have the knowledge and skills needed for safe participation in health and physical education activities. Safety guidelines should outline the practices to be followed for each activity, addressing questions related to equipment, clothing and footwear, facilities, special rules and instructions, and supervision. They should also reflect school board policies on how to conduct activities, and they should be reviewed on a regular basis. While all physical activity involves an element of risk, administrators and teachers have an obligation to provide a safe environment to minimize that risk. Safety awareness, based on up-to-date information, common sense observation, action, and foresight, is the key to safe programming.

Concern for safety should be an integral part of instructional planning and implementation. The primary responsibility for ensuring safer practices rests with the school board and its employees. Wherever possible, potential risks must be identified and procedures developed to prevent or minimize incidents and injuries. In a safe learning environment, the teacher will: 
• be aware of up-to-date safety information; 
• plan activities with safety as a primary consideration; 
• observe students to ensure safe practices are being followed; 
• have a plan in case of emergency; show foresight; 
• act quickly.

Teachers must think about safety before having students participate in any activity. They must consider any potential dangers, assess those dangers, and implement control measures to protect the students from the risks. By implementing safer instructional practices, such as using logical teaching progressions and transitions and choosing age-appropriate and developmentally appropriate activities, teachers can reduce risk and guard against injury.

Students demonstrate that they have the knowledge, skills, and habits of mind required for safe participation in health and physical education activities when they: 
• understand why rules are in place; 
• follow established routines (e.g., for entering and leaving the gym, changing clothes, and engaging in warm-up and cool-down activities) and apply personal safety skills related to physical activities in the classroom, gymnasium, school, school yard, and community; 
• identify possible safety concerns; 
• suggest and implement appropriate safety procedures; 
• follow the instructions outlined for each activity (e.g., for starting and stopping); consistently show care and concern for their safety and that of others; 
• wear clothing and use protection appropriate to the activities (e.g., a hat and sunscreen for outdoor activities), wear appropriate footwear and ensure that shoelaces are tied, and remove jewellery when participating in physical activities; 
• handle equipment safely and show awareness of the space around them; 
• take age-appropriate and developmentally appropriate responsibility for safe behaviour (e.g., for the safe use of equipment) and take necessary precautions when engaging in activities (e.g., using a safety mat); 
• follow rules and expectations pertaining to the setting for the activity (e.g., skiing only in designated areas, following playground rules).

When considering student safety, including their physical safety, it is important to ensure that students feel comfortable emotionally and psychologically. For example, teachers should be aware of student comfort and safety when students are changing their clothing for physical education, forming groups, demonstrating physical tasks, and discussing health topics. They should also ensure that all students – students of all cultures, abilities, genders, and sexual orientations – feel included and recognized in all activities and discussions.

It is vitally important that parents inform appropriate school staff members of any medical conditions, including allergies, diabetes, or hemophilia, that might affect their children’s participation in physical activities. Sabrina’s Law: An Act to Protect Anaphylactic Pupils requires all school boards to have an anaphylaxis policy. Boards must provide regular training of school staff in dealing with life-threatening allergies, and school principals are required to maintain individual plans for pupils who have an anaphylactic allergy, and have emergency procedures in place for anaphylactic pupils.

CROSS-CURRICULAR AND INTEGRATED LEARNING

In cross-curricular learning, students are provided with opportunities to learn and use related content and/or skills in two or more subjects. For example, all subjects, including health and physical education, can be related to the language curriculum. In health and physical education, students use a range of language skills: they build subject-specific vocabulary; they use words and their bodies to communicate feelings and share and interpret information; and they read about current health issues and research new information. Teachers can also use reading material about health and physical education in their language lessons. Similarly, health and physical education lessons can be used as a vehicle for instruction in critical literacy. Students can interpret product information on food labels and critique media messages related to gender stereotypes, body image, or alcohol use. Students can also analyse and adapt fitness plans with reference to criteria such as ability levels, individual interests, resource requirements, and personal goals.

In integrated learning, students are provided with opportunities to work towards meeting expectations from two or more subjects within a single unit, lesson, or activity. By linking expectations from different subject areas, teachers can provide students with multiple opportunities to reinforce and demonstrate their knowledge and skills in a range of settings. There are clear connections, for example, between the expectations in health and physical education and those in other subject areas, such as language, science, and social studies. Health and physical education can be used to provide other ways of learning and making connections.

In integrated learning, teachers need to ensure that the specific knowledge and skills for each subject are taught. For example, if students are illustrating a number sentence in mathematics by means of jumping or if they are using their bodies to make the shapes of letters to spell a word in language, the teacher should ensure that health and physical education expectations for jumping and landing in control and for building fitness, including body strength and flexibility, are integrated into the activities.

Integrated learning can also be a solution to problems of fragmentation and isolated skill instruction – that is, in integrated learning, students can learn and apply skills in a meaningful context. In such contexts, students also have an opportunity to develop their ability to think and reason and to transfer knowledge and skills from one subject area to another.

PLANNING HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS FOR STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL EDUCATION NEEDS

Classroom teachers are the key educators of students who have special education needs. They have a responsibility to help all students learn, and they work collaboratively with special education teachers, where appropriate, to achieve this goal. They commit to assisting every student to prepare for living with the highest degree of independence possible.

Education for All: The Report of the Expert Panel on Literacy and Numeracy Instruction for Students With Special Education Needs, Kindergarten to Grade 6, 2005 describes a set of beliefs, based in research, that should guide all program planning for students with special education needs. Teachers planning health and physical education programs need to pay particular attention to these beliefs, which are as follows: 
• All students can succeed. 
• Universal design and differentiated instruction are effective and interconnected means of meeting the learning or productivity needs of any group of students. 
• Successful instructional practices are founded on evidence-based research, tempered by experience. 
• Classroom teachers are key educators for a student’s literacy and numeracy development. 
• Each student has his or her own unique patterns of learning. 
• Classroom teachers need the support of the larger community to create a learning environment that supports students with special education needs. 
• Fairness is not sameness.

In any given classroom, students may demonstrate a wide range of strengths and needs. Teachers plan programs that recognize this diversity and give students performance tasks that respect their particular abilities so that all students can derive the greatest possible benefit from the teaching and learning process. The use of flexible groupings for instruction and the provision of ongoing assessment are important elements of programs that accommodate a diversity of learning needs.

In planning health and physical education programs for students with special education needs, teachers should begin by examining both the curriculum expectations for the appropriate grade level of the individual student and his or her strengths and learning needs to determine which of the following options is appropriate for the student: 
• no accommodations4 or modifications; or 
• accommodations only; or 
• modified expectations, with the possibility of accommodations; or 
• alternative expectations, which are not derived from the curriculum expectations for a grade and which constitute alternative programs.

If the student requires either accommodations or modified expectations, or both, the relevant information, as described in the following paragraphs, must be recorded in his or her Individual Education Plan (IEP). More detailed information about planning programs for students with special education needs, including students who require alternative programs,5 can be found in The Individual Education Plan (IEP): A Resource Guide, 2004 (referred to hereafter as the IEP Resource Guide, 2004). For a detailed discussion of the ministry’s requirements for IEPs, see Individual Education Plans: Standards for Development, Program Planning, and Implementation, 2000 (referred to hereafter as IEP Standards, 2000). (Both documents are available at www.edu.gov.on.ca.)

4. Accommodations refers to individualized teaching and assessment strategies, human supports, and/or individualized equipment. 
5. Alternative programs are identified on the IEP form by the term “alternative (ALT)”.

Students Requiring Accommodations Only

Some students with special education needs are able, with certain accommodations, to participate in the regular curriculum and to demonstrate learning independently. (Accommodations do not alter the provincial curriculum expectations for the grade level.) The accommodations required to facilitate the student’s learning must be identified in his or her IEP (see IEP Standards, 2000, page 11). A student’s IEP is likely to reflect the same accommodations for many, or all, subject areas. Providing accommodations to students with special education needs should be the first option considered in program planning. Instruction based on principles of universal design6 and differentiated instruction7 focuses on the provision of accommodations to meet the diverse needs of learners.

Providing accommodations to students with special education needs should be the first option considered in program planning. Instruction based on principles of universal design6 and differentiated instruction7 focuses on the provision of accommodations to meet the diverse needs of learners.

6. The goal of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is to create a learning environment that is open and accessible to all students, regardless of age, skills, or situation. Instruction based on principles of universal design is flexible and supportive, can be adjusted to meet different student needs, and enables all students to access the curriculum as fully as possible. 
7. Differentiated instruction is effective instruction that shapes each student’s learning experience in response to his or her particular learning preferences, interests, and readiness to learn.
 
There are three types of accommodations: 
• Instructional accommodations are changes in teaching strategies, including styles of presentation, methods of organization, or use of technology and multimedia. 
• Environmental accommodations are changes that the student may require in the classroom and/or school environment, such as preferential seating or special lighting. 
• Assessment accommodations are changes in assessment procedures that enable the student to demonstrate his or her learning, such as allowing additional time to complete tests or assignments or permitting oral responses to test questions (see page 29 of the IEP Resource Guide, 2004 for more examples).

If a student requires “accommodations only”in health and physical education, assessment and evaluation of his or her achievement will be based on the appropriate grade-level curriculum expectations and the achievement levels outlined in this document. The IEP box on the student’s Provincial Report Card will not be checked, and no information on the provision of accommodations will be included.

Students Requiring Modified Expectations

In health and physical education, modified expectations for most students with special education needs will be based on the regular grade-level curriculum, with changes in the number and/or complexity of the expectations. Modified expectations must represent specific, realistic, observable, and measurable achievements, and must describe specific knowledge and/or skills that the student can demonstrate independently, given the appropriate assessment accommodations.

Modified expectations must indicate the knowledge and/or skills the student is expected to demonstrate and have assessed in each reporting period (IEP Standards, 2000, pages 10 and 11). Modified expectations should be expressed in such a way that the student and parents can understand exactly what the student is expected to know or be able to do, on the basis of which his or her performance will be evaluated and a grade or mark recorded on the Provincial Report Card. The student’s learning expectations must be reviewed in relation to the student’s progress at least once every reporting period, and must be updated as necessary (IEP Standards, 2000, page 11).

If a student requires modified expectations in health and physical education, assessment and evaluation of his or her achievement will be based on the learning expectations identified in the IEP and on the achievement levels outlined in this document. On the Provincial Report Card, the IEP box must be checked for any subject in which the student requires modified expectations, and the appropriate statement from the Guide to the Provincial Report Card, Grades 1–8, 1998 (page 8) must be inserted. The teacher’s comments should include relevant information on the student’s demonstrated learning of the modified expectations, as well as next steps for the student’s learning in the subject.

Guidelines for Meeting Special Needs in Health and Physical Education

The following general guidelines can help teachers ensure that students with special education needs are able to participate as fully as possible in health and physical education activities: 
• Focus instruction on what the student is able to do rather than on his or her disability or special education needs. 
• Consult with the student about his or her needs and about choosing strategies that will help him or her feel comfortable and included. 
• Approach each situation on an individual basis, in consultation with the special education teacher and/or support systems and agencies, making individual adaptations in response to the student’s needs, and requirements outlined in the IEP. 
• Make adjustments only when necessary and consider adjustments to be temporary and fluid. Continue to make accommodations and modifications as needed. 
• Break down new skills and focus on building each skill in a structured progression. 
• Be fair to all participants and avoid drawing attention to accommodations or modifications that are provided for individual students. 
• Make sure appropriate equipment is available, and use specialized equipment, such as balls of appropriate sizes, colours, weights, and/or textures, when necessary. 
• Adjust the rules of activities to increase students’ chances of success while retaining a suitable level of challenge (e.g., by increasing the number of tries/attempts allowed, making a target bigger or bringing it closer, adjusting the size of the playing area, varying the tempo of the music, lengthening or shortening the playing time). 
• Give verbal cues or prompts. 
• Have a partner provide assistance. 
• Consider what accommodations, adjustments, or special guidelines may be required to assist students in understanding social rules and codes of conduct in a variety of spaces, and in coping with change room routines, transitions between activities, and moving to and from the gymnasium.

Depending on the special education needs of the students, some additional considerations may be relevant for their instruction in health education. These considerations may apply to all health topics, but are particularly relevant to topics covered in the Growth and Development component of the Healthy Living strand in the 1998 curriculum document. Some students with intellectual and physical disabilities may be at greater risk of exploitation and abuse. These students may also have had fewer formal and informal opportunities to participate in sexual health education. Teachers need to ensure that these students’ privacy and dignity are protected, and that the resources used are appropriate to their physical, intellectual, and emotional development. Different kinds of accommodations and approaches will be required for different students, but it is important to ensure that all students have access to information and support regarding their sexual health.

Some students with special education needs may have difficulty with abstract thinking, including thinking about the consequences of their behaviour, and may have trouble understanding the boundaries between private and public with respect to behaviour or their own bodies. When teaching students with special education needs about sexual health, it is important to teach the information in a variety of ways and to provide ample opportunity for information to be repeated and for skills such as refusal skills to be practised and reinforced. Examples need to be concrete. Students need to be taught about their right to refuse and about ways of showing affection appropriately.

PROGRAM CONSIDERATIONS FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS

They each have a language, a culture, and background experiences. Effective teachers draw on these resources and build new concepts on this strong experiential base. 
Y.S. Freeman and D.E. Freeman, Closing the Achievement Gap: How to Reach Limited-Formal-Schooling and Long-Term English Learners (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2002), p. 16

Ontario schools have some of the most multilingual student populations in the world. The first language of approximately twenty per cent of the children in Ontario’s English- language schools is a language other than English. Ontario’s linguistic heritage includes many First Nation and Inuit languages, the Métis language, and many African, Asian, and European languages. It also includes some varieties of English – also referred to as dialects – that differ significantly from the English required for success in Ontario schools. Many English language learners were born in Canada and have been raised in families and communities in which languages other than English, or varieties of English that differ from the language used in the classroom, are spoken. Other English language learners arrive in Ontario as newcomers from other countries; they may have experience of highly sophisticated educational systems, or they may have come from regions where access to formal schooling was limited.

When they start school in Ontario, many of these children are entering a new linguistic and cultural environment. All teachers share in the responsibility for these students’ English-language development.

English language learners (students who are learning English as a second or additional language in English-language schools) bring a rich diversity of background knowledge and experience to the classroom. These students’ linguistic and cultural backgrounds not only support their learning in their new environment but also become a cultural asset in the classroom community. Teachers will find positive ways to incorporate this diversity into their instructional programs and into the classroom environment.

Most English language learners in Ontario schools have an age-appropriate proficiency in their first language. Although they need frequent opportunities to use English at school, there are important educational and social benefits associated with continued development of their first language while they are learning English. Teachers need to encourage parents to continue to use their own language at home in rich and varied ways as a foundation for language and literacy development in English. It is also important for teachers to find opportunities to bring students’ languages into the classroom, using parents and community members as a resource.

During their first few years in Ontario schools, English language learners may receive support through one of two distinct programs from teachers who specialize in meeting their language-learning needs:

English as a Second Language (ESL) programs are for students born in Canada or newcomers whose first language is a language other than English, or is a variety of English significantly different from that used for instruction in Ontario schools.

English Literacy Development (ELD) programs are primarily for newcomers whose first language is a language other than English, or is a variety of English significantly different from that used for instruction in Ontario schools, and who arrive with significant gaps in their education. These children generally come from countries where access to education is limited or where there are limited opportunities to develop language and literacy skills in any language. Some First Nation, Métis, or Inuit students from remote communities in Ontario may also have had limited opportunities for formal schooling, and they also may benefit from ELD instruction.

In planning programs for children with linguistic backgrounds other than English, teachers need to recognize the importance of the orientation process, understanding that every learner needs to adjust to the new social environment and language in a unique way and at an individual pace. For example, children who are in an early stage of English-language acquisition may go through a “silent period”during which they closely observe the interactions and physical surroundings of their new learning environment. They may use body language rather than speech or they may use their first language until they have gained enough proficiency in English to feel confident of their interpretations and responses. Students thrive in a safe, supportive, and welcoming environment that nurtures their selfconfidence while they are receiving focused literacy instruction. When they are ready to participate, in paired, small-group, or whole-class activities, some students will begin by using a single word or phrase to communicate a thought, while others will speak quite fluently.

In a supportive learning environment, most students will develop oral language proficiency quite quickly. Teachers can sometimes be misled by the high degree of oral proficiency demonstrated by many English language learners in their use of everyday English and may mistakenly conclude that these students are equally proficient in their use of academic English. Most English language learners who have developed oral proficiency in everyday English will nevertheless require instructional scaffolding to meet curriculum expectations. Research has shown that it takes five to seven years for most English language learners to catch up to their English-speaking peers in their ability to use English for academic purposes.

Responsibility for students’ English-language development is shared by the classroom teacher, the ESL/ELD teacher (where available), and other school staff. Volunteers and peers may also be helpful in supporting English language learners in the gymnasium and classroom for health and physical education. Teachers must adapt the instructional program in order to facilitate the success of these students in their classrooms. Appropriate adaptations for health and physical education include: 
• modification of some or all of the subject expectations so that they are challenging but attainable for the learner at his or her present level of English proficiency, given the necessary support from the teacher; use of a variety of instructional strategies (e.g., modelling; peer support; 
• use of music, movement, and gestures; open-ended activities; extensive use of visual cues, images, diagrams; visual representations of key ideas; graphic organizers; scaffolding; preteaching of key vocabulary; peer tutoring; strategic use of students’ first languages); 
• use of a variety of learning resources (e.g., simplified text, illustrated guides or diagrams that show how to use equipment or perform skills, word walls with vocabulary specific to health and physical education, food guides and other health resources available in languages that students speak at home, bilingual dictionaries, visual material, displays; music, dances, games, and materials and activities that reflect cultural diversity); 
• use of assessment accommodations (e.g., provision of extra time; use of interviews and oral presentations; demonstration of learning through participation in movement activities, songs, or chants; use of portfolios, demonstrations, visual representations or models, or tasks requiring completion of graphic organizers instead of essay questions and other assessment tasks that depend heavily on proficiency in English).

Teachers need to adapt the program for English language learners as they acquire English proficiency. For students in the early stages of language acquisition, teachers need to modify the curriculum expectations in some or all curriculum areas. Most English language learners require accommodations for an extended period, long after they have achieved proficiency in everyday English.

When learning expectations are modified for English language learners, evaluation will be based on the documented modified expectations. This will be noted on the report card and explained to parents. The health and physical education program provides English language learners with multiple modes of expression beyond written and oral texts. The program meets the widely differing needs of these students by giving them opportunities to demonstrate competence and experience success through participation in many different kinds of physical activities. Opportunities to build relationships, interact with other students, play, and cooperate can help students from other countries adjust to their new environment. Some students may need additional support in discussions of topics in the health and physical education program that may conflict with their personal experiences and cultural norms. Sensitivity is required in assessing and addressing these students’ individual needs. For further information on supporting English language learners, refer to the following documents: 
• Supporting English Language Learners in Grades 1 to 8: A Practical Guide for Ontario Educators, 2008 
• Supporting English Language Learners with Limited Prior Schooling: A Practical Guide for Ontario Educators, Grades 3 to 12, 2008 
• English Language Learners – ESL and ELD Programs and Services: Policies and Procedures for Ontario Elementary and Secondary Schools, Kindergarten to Grade 12, 2007 
• Many Roots, Many Voices: Supporting English Language Learners in Every Classroom – A Practical Guide for Ontario Educators, 2005

ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Ontario’s education system will prepare students with the knowledge, skills, perspectives, and practices they need to be environmentally responsible citizens. Students will understand our fundamental connections to each other and to the world around us through our relationship to food, water, energy, air, and land, and our interaction with all living things. The education system will provide opportunities within the classroom and the community for students to engage in actions that deepen this understanding. 
Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow: A Policy Framework for Environmental Education in Ontario Schools (2009), p. 6

Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow: A Policy Framework for Environmental Education in Ontario Schools outlines an approach to environmental education that recognizes the needs of all Ontario students and promotes environmental responsibility in the operations of all levels of the education system.

The three goals outlined in Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow are organized around the themes of teaching and learning, student engagement and community connections, and environmental leadership. The first goal is to promote learning about environmental issues and solutions. The second is to engage students in practising and promoting environmental stewardship, both in the school and in the community. The third stresses the importance of providing leadership by implementing and promoting responsible environmental practices throughout the education system so that staff, parents, community members, and students become dedicated to living more sustainably.

Health and physical education offers many opportunities for accomplishing these goals. The learning environments for health and physical education include the school yard, fields and trails in the vicinity of the school, and various other outdoor venues. Teaching students to appreciate and respect the environment is an integral part of being active in these spaces. Appreciating the value of fresh air and outdoor spaces, understanding the environmental benefits of healthy practices such as active transportation and the environmental implications of various food choices, being aware of the impact of using trails, and understanding the health risks associated with environmental factors such as sun exposure and air pollution are all components of environmental education that can be integrated with learning in health and physical education. To facilitate these connections, health and physical education teachers are encouraged to take students out of the classroom and into the world beyond the school to help students observe, explore, and appreciate nature as they discover the benefits of being active outdoors.

Living skills, which are integrated throughout the health and physical education curriculum, are also closely tied to environmental education and education for sustainable development. As students learn more about themselves through the development of personal skills, learn to work effectively and respectfully with others through the development of interpersonal skills, and acquire the capacity for systems thinking through the development of critical and creative thinking skills, they increase their capacity to make connections with the world around them and to become environmentally responsible citizens.

HEALTHY RELATIONSHIPS AND HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Every student is entitled to learn in a safe, caring environment, free from violence and harassment. Research has shown that students learn and achieve better in such environments. A safe and supportive social environment in a school is founded on healthy relationships – the relationships between students, between students and adults, and between adults. Healthy relationships are based on respect, caring, empathy, trust, and dignity, and thrive in an environment in which diversity is honoured and accepted. Healthy relationships do not tolerate abusive, controlling, violent, harassing, or inappropriate behaviours. To experience themselves as valued and connected members of an inclusive social environment, students need to be involved in healthy relationships with their peers, teachers, and other members of the school community.

Several provincial policies and initiatives, including the “Foundations for a Healthy School”framework, the equity and inclusive education strategy, and the Safe Schools strategy, are designed to foster caring and safe learning environments in the context of healthy and inclusive schools. These policies and initiatives promote positive learning and teaching environments that support the development of healthy relationships, encourage academic achievement, and help all students reach their full potential.

In its 2008 report, Shaping a Culture of Respect in Our Schools: Promoting Safe and Healthy Relationships, the Safe Schools Action Team confirmed “that the most effective way to enable all students to learn about healthy and respectful relationships is through the school curriculum”(p. 11). Teachers can promote this learning in a variety of ways. For example, by giving students opportunities to apply critical thinking and problem-solving strategies and to address issues through group discussions, role play, case study analysis, and other means, they can help them develop and practise the skills they need for building healthy relationships. Co-curricular activities such as clubs and intramural and interschool sports provide additional opportunities for the kind of interaction that helps students build healthy relationships. Teachers can also have a decisive influence on students by modelling the behaviours, values, and skills that are needed to develop and sustain healthy relationships, and by taking advantage of “teachable moments”to address immediate relationship issues that may arise among students.

In health education, the study of healthy relationships, particularly with respect to bullying/ harassment and violence prevention, should include a focus on sexist, racist, and homophobic behaviour. Examination of other types of harassment, including weight-based teasing or teasing based on appearance or ability, should also be addressed. In creating an inclusive and respectful learning environment, teachers should be able to examine their own biases and seek out support for presenting material with which they are not comfortable.

The skills that are needed to build and support healthy relationships can be found throughout the health and physical education curriculum. Expectations that focus on the characteristics of healthy relationships and on ways of responding to challenges in relationships introduce students, in age-appropriate ways, to the knowledge and skills they will need to maintain healthy relationships throughout their lives.

Students need to develop and practise effective interpersonal skills to support their ability to relate positively to others. The living skills component of the health and physical education curriculum provides the basis for developing the communication, relationship, and social skills that are necessary for forming and maintaining healthy relationships. Physical activities in the gymnasium and other spaces and health education discussions in the classroom provide numerous and varied opportunities for students to interact and refine these skills. In addition, students improve their ability to contribute to healthy relationships as they develop self-awareness skills, personal coping and management skills, and critical and creative thinking skills and processes in all strands of the health and physical education curriculum.

EQUITY AND INCLUSIVE EDUCATION IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

The Ontario equity and inclusive education strategy focuses on respecting diversity, promoting inclusive education, and identifying and eliminating the discriminatory biases, systemic barriers, and power dynamics that limit the ability of students to learn, grow, and contribute to society. Antidiscrimination education continues to be an important and integral component of the strategy.

In an environment based on the principles of inclusive education, all students, parents, and other members of the school community – regardless of ancestry, culture, ethnicity, sex, physical or intellectual ability, race, religion, gender identity, sexual orientation, socio-economic status, or other similar factors – are welcomed, included, treated fairly, and respected. Diversity is valued, and all members of the school community feel safe, comfortable, and accepted. Every student is supported and inspired to succeed in a culture of high expectations for learning. In an inclusive education system, all students see themselves reflected in the curriculum, their physical surroundings, and the broader environment, so that they can feel engaged in and empowered by their learning experiences.

The implementation of antidiscrimination principles in education influences all aspects of school life. It promotes a school climate that encourages all students to work to high levels of achievement, affirms the worth of all students, and helps students strengthen their sense of identity and develop a positive self-image. It encourages staff and students alike to value and show respect for diversity in the school and the broader society. Antidiscrimination education promotes fairness, healthy relationships, and active, responsible citizenship.

Teachers can give students a variety of opportunities to learn about diversity and diverse perspectives. By drawing attention to the contributions of women, the perspectives of various ethnocultural, religious, and racial communities, and the beliefs and practices of First Nation, Métis, and Inuit peoples, they enable students from a wide range of backgrounds to see themselves reflected in the curriculum. It is essential that learning activities and materials used to support the curriculum reflect the diversity of Ontario society. In addition, teachers should differentiate instruction and assessment strategies to take into account the background and experiences, as well as the interests, aptitudes, and learning needs of all students.

School–community interactions should reflect the diversity of both the local community and the broader society. A variety of strategies can be used to communicate with and engage parents and community members from diverse communities, and to encourage their participation in and support of school activities, programs, and events. Family and community members should be invited to take part in teacher interviews, the school council, and the parent involvement committee, and to attend and support activities such as plays, concerts, co-curricular activities and events, and various special events at the school. Schools may consider offering assistance with childcare or making alternative scheduling arrangements in order to help caregivers participate. Students can also help by encouraging and accompanying their families, who may be unfamiliar with the Ontario school system. Special outreach strategies and encouragement may be needed to draw in the parents of English language learners and First Nation, Métis, or Inuit students, and to make them feel more comfortable in their interactions with the school.

Active Living and Movement Competence

In implementing the active living and movement competence strands of the health and physical education curriculum, teachers should ensure that students are exposed to a wide range of activities and skills that appeal to both male and female students. Sports and games should be balanced with small-group, individual, and recreation activities, including exercises for physical fitness and activities for stress reduction, such as simple yoga techniques.

Health and Physical Education

Teachers must also provide accommodation for students from various faith communities, consistent with the board’s religious accommodation guideline – for example, in some cases, segregated swimming classes for male and female students and same-sex partnering for small-group activities might be required – and be aware of clothing restrictions that might exist for some students.

The physical activity component of the curriculum should also take into account the range of student abilities and the diversity of their backgrounds. Teachers should familiarize themselves with strategies that would allow them to involve students with diverse backgrounds and needs in an appropriate way. For example, a number of games have First Nations, Métis, or Inuit origins. Lacrosse is perhaps the best known. It evolved from games played by the Haudenosaunee or Iroquois nations and continues to be an important component of Iroquois culture. When introducing these kinds of activities into the program, teachers should make the connection to the cultural heritage explicit.

Healthy Living

The Healthy Living expectations contained in this document provide teachers with the opportunity to address a number of key issues related to equity, antidiscrimination, and inclusion. Instruction relating to healthy eating should address the various beliefs and religious and cultural factors that influence food choices and eating habits (e.g., vegetarianism, religious fasting, traditional foods). The issue of body image and the detrimental effects of homogenized standards of beauty and physical appearance promoted in the media are important for both male and female students. The use of steroids and drugs to enhance athletic performance and appearance, and harmful diets to achieve impossible standards of beauty, should be examined.

LITERACY, MATHEMATICAL LITERACY, AND INQUIRY IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Literacy, mathematical literacy, and inquiry and research skills are critical to students’ success in all subjects of the curriculum and in all areas of their lives.

Literacy is defined as the ability to use language and images in rich and varied forms to read, write, listen, view, represent, and think critically about ideas. It involves the capacity to access, manage, and evaluate information; to think imaginatively and analytically; and to communicate thoughts and ideas effectively. Literacy includes critical thinking and reasoning to solve problems and make decisions related to issues of fairness, equity, and social justice. Literacy connects individuals and communities and is an essential tool for personal growth and active participation in a cohesive, democratic society. 
Reach Every Student: Energizing Ontario Education (2008), p. 6

“Literacy instruction must be embedded across the curriculum. All teachers of all subjects … are teachers of literacy”(Think Literacy Success, Grades 7–12: The Report of the Expert Panel on Students at Risk in Ontario, 2003, p. 10). This quotation illustrates that literacy instruction takes different forms of emphasis in different subjects and also that literacy needs to be explicitly taught.

Providing a solid foundation of language, communication, and thinking skills on which children and youth can develop the skills, knowledge, and attitudes that they need to make healthy decisions with competence and confidence is at the heart of both health and physical literacy.

In the health and physical education program, literacy includes researching, discussing, listening, viewing media, communicating with words and with the body, connecting illustrations and text, role playing to create meaning through stories, and – especially important for kinesthetic learners – communicating through physical activity. Students use language to record their observations, to describe their critical analyses in both informal and formal contexts, and to present their findings in oral, written, graphic, and multimedia forms. Understanding in health and physical education requires the understanding and use of specialized terminology. In all health and physical education programs, students are required to use appropriate and correct terminology and are encouraged to use language with care and precision in order to communicate effectively.

Fostering students’ communication skills is an important part of the teacher’s role in health and physical education. In addition to developing reading, writing, and media literacy skills, students in health and physical education need to be able to communicate orally by listening and speaking and to communicate physically through body language. (Oral communication skills are traditionally thought to include using and interpreting body language. In the health and physical education curriculum, this skill is broadened into its own category of “physical communication skills”.) Developing these skills will help students to acquire other learning in health and physical education and to communicate their understanding of what they have learned.

Physical communication skills are fundamental to the development of physical literacy. Students learn to understand how their bodies move and how to use their bodies to communicate their intended movements. They learn to adjust their movements through selfcorrection and peer feedback in order to improve the efficiency or effectiveness of the action. Students learn to use their bodies to express their feelings and also learn to interpret body language for a variety of purposes, such as recognizing signs of danger in the body language of others, recognizing physical signs of emotions during conflict resolution, and reading body cues in game situations. To develop their physical communication skills, students need to observe movement and to practise moving and expressing themselves through their bodies. Physical education activities and active and experiential learning in health education provide students with numerous opportunities for hands-on practice and observation of these physical communication skills.

Oral communication skills are also important for the development of health and physical literacy and are essential for thinking and learning. Through purposeful talk, students not only learn to communicate information but also to explore and to understand ideas and concepts, identify and solve problems, organize their experience and knowledge, and express and clarify their thoughts, feelings, and opinions. To develop their oral communication skills, students need numerous opportunities to talk about a range of topics in health and physical education. These opportunities are available throughout the curriculum. The expectations in all strands give students a chance to engage in brainstorming, reporting, and other oral activities to identify what they know about a new topic, discuss strategies for solving a problem, present and defend ideas or debate issues, and offer critiques or feedback on work, skill demonstrations, or opinions expressed by their peers.

Whether students are talking, writing, or showing their understanding in health and physical education, teachers can prompt them, through questioning, to explain the reasoning that they have applied to a particular solution or strategy, or to reflect on what they have done. Because rich, open-ended questioning is the starting point for effective inquiry or for addressing a problem, it is important that teachers model this style of questioning for their students and allow students multiple opportunities to ask, and find answers to, their own questions.

When reading texts related to health and physical education, students use a different set of skills than they do when reading fiction. They need to understand vocabulary and terminology that are unique to health and physical education, and must be able to interpret symbols, charts, and diagrams. To help students construct meaning, it is essential that teachers continue to help students develop their reading skills and strategies when they are reading to learn in health and physical education. In addition, there are many works of fiction that can be used to illustrate key concepts in health and physical education, such as resilience, healthy living, and active living. Teachers of Language could assign fictional works that model concepts from the health and physical education curriculum in order to provide opportunities for meaningful discussion about healthy, active living.

The Ministry of Education has facilitated the development of materials to support literacy instruction across the curriculum. Helpful advice for integrating literacy instruction in health and physical education may be found in the following resource materials: 

• Me Read? And How! Ontario Teachers Report on How to Improve Boys’ Literacy Skills, 2009 
• A Guide to Effective Literacy Instruction, Grades 4 to 6, Volume Seven: Media Literacy, 2008 
• Me Read? No Way! A Practical Guide to Improving Boys’ Literacy Skills, 2004 
• Think Literacy: Cross-Curricular Approaches, Grades 7–12, 2003
• Think Literacy: Cross-Curricular Approaches, Grades 7–12 – Subject-Specific Examples: Health and Physical Education, Grades 7–9, 2004 
• Webcasts for Educators: Critical Literacy, November 29, 2007 (available through www.edu.gov.on.ca or on DVD)

In addition to providing opportunities for literacy development, health and physical education also reinforces mathematical literacy, particularly in areas involving computation and graphing. For example, calculations and graphing are often used when tracking fitness improvements or when recording food intake in connection with the development of healthy eating plans.

Inquiry is at the heart of learning in all subject areas. In health and physical education, students are encouraged to develop their ability to ask questions and to explore a variety of possible answers to those questions. Careful structuring of learning opportunities and teacher questioning can encourage the development of these inquiry skills in students. Within the movement competence strand, for example, questioning plays a large role in learning about movement strategies. Students solve problems in order to increase their chances of success in an activity. Solving problems enables students to explore, discover, create, experiment, and arrive at solutions.

Different kinds of questions can be used to stimulate thinking. These include:

• simple skill-related questions, which elicit purposeful feedback and develop skill awareness (e.g., How was your head positioned when you landed from the jump? What information should you be looking for when reading a food label?); 

• analytical questions, which develop decision-making and problem-solving skills with respect to game or activity strategy or a personal health choice by asking how or why (e.g., How can you and your partner work together in order to keep possession of the ball longer? How do you go about solving a problem in a relationship? What steps do you need to take?); 

• review questions, which develop thinking skills related to reflecting on an activity or on the development of a skill and devising ways to improve on the activity or approach (e.g., What could you change in this activity so that everyone has more of a chance to be involved in the play? What did you like about that activity? What skills are you developing by playing this game? What might you have done differently that might have been less risky?).

The ability to respond to such questions helps students build their confidence and competence as they develop physical and health literacy. The teacher’s questioning also provides students with a model for developing their own habits of inquiry.

As they advance through the grades, students acquire the skills to locate relevant information from a variety of sources, such as books, periodicals, dictionaries, encyclopedias, interviews, videos, and the Internet. The questioning they practised in the early grades becomes more sophisticated as they learn that all sources of information have a particular point of view and that the recipient of the information has a responsibility to evaluate it, determine its validity and relevance, and use it in appropriate ways. The ability to locate, question, and evaluate the quality of information allows a student to become an independent, lifelong learner.

CRITICAL THINKING AND CRITICAL LITERACY IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Critical thinking is the process of thinking about ideas or situations in order to understand them fully, identify their implications, make a judgement, and/or guide decision making. Critical thinking includes skills such as questioning, predicting, hypothesizing, analysing, synthesizing, examining opinions, identifying values and issues, detecting bias, and distinguishing between alternatives. It involves an inquiry process of exploring questions about and solutions for issues that are not clearly defined and for which there are no clear-cut answers. Students who are taught these skills become critical thinkers who do not merely accept the obvious as a given.

Students use critical thinking skills in health and physical education when they assess, analyse, and/or evaluate the impact of something and when they form an opinion about something and support that opinion with a rationale. In order to think critically, students need to examine the opinions and values of others, detect bias, look for implied meaning, and use the information gathered to form a personal opinion or stance, or a personal plan of action with regard to making a difference. The development of these skills is supported by the living skills component of the curriculum, which is integrated with expectations in all three strands.

As they work to achieve the health and physical education expectations, students frequently need to identify the possible implications of choices. As they gather information from a variety of sources, they need to be able to interpret what they are listening to, reading, or viewing; to look for instances of bias; and to determine why that source might express that particular bias.

In developing critical thinking skills in health and physical education, students must ask good questions to interpret information, detect bias, and consider the values and perspectives of a variety of groups and individuals.

Critical literacy is the capacity for a particular type of critical thinking that involves looking beyond the literal meaning of a text to determine what is present and what is missing, in order to analyse and evaluate the text’s complete meaning and the author’s intent. Critical literacy goes beyond conventional critical thinking by focusing on issues related to fairness, equity, and social justice. Critically literate students adopt a critical stance, asking what view of the world the text advances and whether they find this view acceptable, who benefits from the text, and how the reader is influenced.

Critically literate students understand that meaning is not found in texts in isolation. People make sense of a text, or determine what a text means, in a variety of ways. Students therefore need to be aware of points of view (e.g., those of parents and students), the context (e.g., the beliefs and practices of the time and place in which a text is read or written), the background of the person interacting with the text (e.g., upbringing, friends, school and other communities, education, experiences), intertextuality (e.g., information that a viewer brings to a text from other texts read previously), gaps in the text (e.g., information that is left out and that the reader must fill in), and silences in the text (e.g., voices of a person or group not heard).

In health and physical education, students who are critically literate are able, for example, to actively analyse media messages and determine potential motives and underlying messages. They are able to determine what biases might be contained in texts, media, and resource material and why that might be, how the content of these materials was determined and by whom, and whose perspectives might have been left out and why. Students would then be equipped to produce their own interpretation of the issue. Opportunities should be provided for students to engage in a critical discussion of “texts”, which can include television programs, movies, web pages, advertising, music, gestures, oral texts, and other means of expression. This discussion empowers students to understand how the authors of texts are trying to affect and change them as members of society. Language and communication are never neutral: they are used to inform, entertain, persuade, and manipulate.

Metacognition is the process of thinking about one’s own thought processes. Metacognitive skills include the ability to monitor one’s own learning. Acquiring and using metacognitive skills has emerged as a powerful approach for promoting a focus on thinking skills in literacy and across all disciplines. In health and physical education, metacognitive skills are developed in a number of ways. The development of living skills, for example, equips students to reflect on their own learning as they develop knowledge and skills in each of the three strands of the curriculum. Personal skills in particular provide students with the capacity to recognize their strengths and needs and monitor their progress, while coping, adaptive, and management skills help them respond to challenges and changes as they learn and develop. Within the Healthy Living strand, students are expected not only to learn about health concepts but also to use this information to make personal health choices and to understand the many ways in which their health and well-being are related to the health and well-being of others and to a variety of factors in the broader world. Learning to make these connections helps students move beyond simple content knowledge and apply this information meaningfully to their lives.

THE ROLE OF THE SCHOOL LIBRARY IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS

The school library program can help to build and transform students’ knowledge to support a lifetime of learning in an information- and knowledge-based society. The school library program supports student success across the health and physical education curriculum by encouraging students to read widely, teaching them to read many forms of text for understanding and enjoyment, and helping them to improve their research skills and to use information gathered through research effectively. The school library program enables students to: 
• develop a love of reading for learning and for pleasure; 
• acquire an understanding of the richness and diversity of artistic and informational texts produced in Canada and around the world; 
• obtain access to programs, resources, and integrated technologies that support all curriculum areas; 
• understand and value the role of public library systems as a resource for lifelong learning.

The school library program plays a key role in the development of information literacy and research skills. In collaboration with classroom or content-area teachers, teacherlibrarians design, teach, and provide students with authentic information and research tasks that foster learning, including the ability to: 
• access, select, gather, process, critically evaluate, create, and communicate information; 
• use the information obtained to explore and investigate issues, solve problems, make decisions, build knowledge, create personal meaning, and enrich their lives; 
• communicate their findings for different audiences, using a variety of formats and technologies; 
• use information and research with understanding, responsibility, and imagination.

In addition, teacher-librarians can work with teachers of health and physical education to help students: 
• develop literacy in using non-print forms, such as the Internet, CDs, DVDs, and videos, in order to access health and physical education information, databases, demonstrations, and a variety of performances; 
• design inquiry questions for research for health and physical education projects; 
• create and produce single-medium or multimedia presentations.

Teachers of health and physical education are also encouraged to collaborate with both local librarians and teacher-librarians on collecting digital, print, and visual resources for projects (e.g., storybooks on a theme or topic to inspire role play in the primary grades; picture books for inspiration; culture-specific image collections; informational and performance videos). Librarians may also be able to assist in accessing a variety of online resources and collections (e.g., professional articles, image galleries, videos).

In addition to resource materials in the school library, teachers may be able to access specialized libraries of copyright-free music collections for use in movement education and dance. Teachers need to discuss with students the concept of ownership of work and the importance of copyright in all forms of media.

THE ROLE OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Information and communications technology (ICT) provides a range of tools that can significantly extend and enrich teachers’ instructional strategies and support students’ learning in health and physical education. ICT tools include multimedia resources, databases, the Internet, digital cameras, and an extensive array of specialized software. Computer programs can help students to collect, organize, and sort the data they gather, and to write, edit, and present reports on their findings. ICT can also be used to connect students to other schools, at home and abroad, and to bring the global community into the local classroom.

The integration of information and communications technology into the health and physical education program represents a natural extension of the learning expectations, as does the use of other technological devices such as pedometers and heart rate monitors. Whenever appropriate, therefore, students should be encouraged to use ICT to support and communicate their learning. Current technologies are useful both as research tools and as creative media. For example, students working individually or in groups can use computer technology and/or Internet websites to gain access to health, fitness, or safety information. Software can be used to record food choices over a period of time, calculate nutrient intake, maintain a fitness profile, monitor fitness targets, and assist with other tasks that help students achieve healthy living goals. Students can also use interactive computer software to participate in a range of simulated physical activities. In addition, students can use digital cameras and projectors to design and present multimedia works, to record the process of creating their dance or movement sequences, to support the development of movement skills, to record role-playing scenarios while practising interpersonal and decision-making skills related to healthy relationships, and for numerous other purposes.

Although the Internet is a powerful learning tool, all students must be made aware of issues of privacy, safety, and responsible use, as well as of the potential for abuse of this technology, particularly when it is used to promote hatred. ICT tools are also useful for teachers in their teaching practice, both for class instruction and for the design of curriculum units that contain varied approaches to learning to meet diverse student needs. A number of educational software programs to support health and physical education are licensed through the ministry and are listed on www.osapac.org under the Software/Resource Search link.

BUILDING CAREER AWARENESS THROUGH HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Students plan their pathways through school to postsecondary education, training, and/or work on the basis of their understanding of their personal interests, strengths, competencies, and accomplishments, and their knowledge of education and career opportunities. This understanding begins to develop in Grade 1 and continues through Grade 12, as students make assessments of their own learning and their strengths and interests; take part in explorations of jobs and occupations in the community that relate to their school subjects; and review their choices for secondary and postsecondary courses and pathways.

Career exploration activities provide students with practical applications of classroom experiences, as well as opportunities to make connections between what happens in school and what happens in the workplace or the community. Career exploration activities identify relevant applications of students’ academic studies and provide information about how people are contributing to society and the economy.

Students in Grades 1 to 6 are becoming aware of the people in their community and the work they do – at home, on the job, and as volunteers. Teachers should recognize and encourage this growing interest by teaching students to observe and ask questions – such as: What does this job involve? Who is doing the job? What skills do they need to perform the task or carry out the job? What are some of the connections between this job and what I am learning at school?

Students in Grades 7 and 8 may be thinking about their futures and the opportunities available to them in high school, at university or college, in an apprenticeship, or in the world of work. Teachers should provide students in these grades with information about secondary school courses, pathways, and supports, and ensure that they have access to a range of career exploration opportunities, including contacts with career mentors, visits from guest speakers, worksite tours, and job shadowing in occupations that interest them and that make use of the skills they are developing in various subjects at school, including health and physical education.

OVERVIEW OF GRADES 1 TO 3

Children’s early learning experiences have a profound effect on their later development. The health and physical education program for Grades 1 to 3 therefore focuses on the foundational knowledge and skills that students will need in order to develop physical and health literacy and acquire the commitment and capacity to lead healthy, active lives. Through participating in health and physical education in the classroom and gymnasium, out of doors, in schoolyards and school gardens, and in the community, students learn to make healthy active living a part of everyday life. The expectations in these grades provide opportunities for students to strengthen their oral language and knowledge of subjectspecific vocabulary, their kinesthetic awareness and understanding of movement concepts, their capacity for imagining, pretending, and reflecting, and their higher-order thinking skills. All of this learning builds on the foundation laid in the learning expectations of the Kindergarten program, particularly in the areas of Personal and Social Development and Health and Physical Activity.

Student Development and Program Implications 

Program design and delivery must take into account the physical, cognitive, and emotional development of students. The following descriptions of the developmental characteristics of students in the primary grades are general in nature, and individual student characteristics will vary depending on the child’s age, sex, body size, experience, and background.

Physical Domain

Students in the primary grades exhibit a number of developmental characteristics that affect their ability to participate in physical activity. Their large muscle movement is more developed than their small muscle movement, and they are still learning to refine basic motor patterns. Consequently, many students in the primary grades can perform motor skills singly but may have difficulty combining these skills. Although they can master most locomotor activities, their manipulative skills and visual and tracking abilities are still developing. Their stability skills are also developing, and their centre of gravity is generally still high. Muscular endurance is often limited, and there is no significant gender difference in physical abilities.

Programs at this level should involve students in moderate to vigorous activity and provide opportunities for them to take breaks when they tire. Activities should focus on gross motor skill development before proceeding to fine motor development. Throwing and catching activities, for example, should start with large balls or textured objects that are easy to catch before proceeding to the use of smaller objects. Activities for these students should provide opportunities for boys and girls to play together. It is important that students be able to explore a wide range of activities, but they should also have a chance to revisit activities instead of experiencing them only once. 

As in all elementary programs, those for the primary grades should offer opportunities for all students to participate fully (e.g., by ensuring that each child has a piece of equipment needed to participate in the activity) and explore a wide range of activities. Equipment and activities should be modified as needed to permit students with different developmental needs and physical abilities to take part and allow all children to progress at their own rate. The program should provide opportunities for child-initiated individual expression, and students should be free to use their observations, experiences, and background knowledge when choosing activities and equipment. Activities should promote risk taking in a safe environment.

Cognitive Domain

Children at this age have well-developed imaginations and learn best through play and exploration. They are developing thought processes as well as vocabulary, memory, and concepts of time, weight, and space. Their perceptual abilities are also developing rapidly. They tend to be motivated and excited about learning new skills, but their ability to concentrate on a task varies.

Students in the primary grades generally find it easier to learn when learning experiences are divided into manageable pieces. They require concise instructions, short demonstrations, maximum time to explore and create, and opportunities for repetition and practice. Rules for activities should be simple and set clear boundaries. In addition to learning to follow instructions, students in the primary grades should be challenged to think in more sophisticated ways, and they should be given opportunities to question, integrate, analyse, and apply ideas.

Affective Domain

Most students in the primary grades respond well to positive reinforcement and are also learning to respond to constructive feedback. They tend to be egocentric, as their sense of self is still developing, but they are also beginning to develop interpersonal skills and are learning to share and take turns. They are beginning to develop an understanding of game concepts, but winning and losing can be emotionally challenging for them. 

Programs for these students should emphasize participatory and inclusive activities that focus on exploration and creativity rather than on game play that involves winning or losing. The children should be able to explore and play in a safe, cooperative environment. To help them develop the skills they need to interact positively with others, they should also have multiple opportunities to interact in different ways in small groups.

Focus of Learning in Health and Physical Education for the Primary Division

The expectations for health and physical education build upon the prior knowledge, experience, and skills that students bring to the classroom. This base varies naturally from student to student as a result of different levels of prior exposure to the skills, forms, and experiences of health and physical activity. The diversity of the students’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds in Ontario classrooms adds a further dimension to this variability. It is therefore important for instruction and assessment to be differentiated to meet the needs of a wide range of students. Exposure to a broad range of stimuli that reflect diversity is also crucial, with instruction being planned in a way that honours and includes the cultural traditions of students from all groups in the community.

Living Skills

Although the living skill expectations remain the same throughout all grades, the relative emphasis given to personal, interpersonal, and critical and creative thinking skills varies with the developmental level of the students. In the primary division, students are still developing their sense of self, while also learning to identify and manage their feelings. Learning in this division is therefore focused on personal skills and, in particular, selfmonitoring, adaptive, and coping skills. At the same time, primary students are also beginning to develop their interpersonal skills and their critical and creative thinking skills. Consequently, the curriculum provides opportunities for learning basic interpersonal skills, such as positive communication and showing respect for others, that will help them develop their relationships with others, and for using their thinking skills as they learn basic problem-solving processes.

Active Living Strand

The Active Living strand includes a number of core elements and learning objectives that begin in the primary grades and recur throughout the elementary program. These include the daily requirement for at least twenty minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity, an understanding of the benefits of daily physical activity and the factors that contribute to their enjoyment of physical activity, and the development of behaviours that enhance their readiness and ability to take part in the school’s physical activity programs. All of these provide a foundation on which to build the habit of being active on a daily basis. Students also learn how to recognize indicators of fitness, improve their cardiorespiratory fitness, and set simple personal fitness goals. Through other expectations, students learn how to introduce more physical activity into their daily lives and how to take responsibility for their own safety and the safety of those around them while being active.

Movement Competence Strand

Through exploration and play, students in the primary grades learn to develop fundamental movement skills and a variety of stability and locomotor skills. Simple manipulation skills, beginning with throwing and catching, are also introduced. Learning about movement concepts begins with an emphasis on body and spatial awareness and expands later to include the concepts of effort and relationship. In addition, students learn about the components – the skills, equipment, rules, and conventions of fair play and etiquette – of physical activities and how to use simple tactics to enhance their success and develop their confidence and sense of self as they participate in a variety of activities.

Healthy Living Strand

In the primary grades, students are introduced to basic health concepts, given opportunities to apply this knowledge to decisions about their own health, and encouraged to make connections between their health and well-being and their interactions with others and the world around them. Particular emphasis is placed on having students learn how to take responsibility for their own safety, at home and in the community, how to stand up for themselves, and how to get help in situations of abuse. Students also learn to understand and apply basic concepts related to healthy food choices, healthy relationships, diversity, and substance use and potentially addictive behaviours. They learn the names of body parts, begin to understand how their bodies work and develop, and acquire an understanding of some of the factors that contribute to healthy physical and emotional development.

GRADE 1 

Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided to illustrate the intended learning – the concepts that students should understand and the skills they are to acquire – in connection with the particular expectation. The student responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, or word choice typical of students in the different grades.

LIVING SKILLS 

Student learning related to the Living Skills expectations takes place in the context of learning related to the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands, and should be assessed and evaluated within these contexts.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 1, students will: 

1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

1. Living Skills

By the end of Grade 1, students will: 

Personal Skills (PS)*

1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own progress, as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: ask themselves whether they are doing the best they can while they are participating in DPA activities in the classroom; Movement Competence: describe how they feel when they move in different ways; Healthy Living: ask themselves whether they used a tissue or did a “sleeve sneeze”to cover their nose and mouth when sneezing in order to avoid spreading germs)

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: apply knowledge of safety procedures to make themselves feel safer and more confident as they play on the playground; Movement Competence: try to express themselves positively when they are excited or disappointed during a game or when they are learning a new skill; Healthy Living: be able to use proper terminology to name their body parts, so they can explain where they may be hurt or sore) 

* The abbreviation(s) for the three categories of living skills – PS, IS, and CT – appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, in
strands A–C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 18–21 for a discussion of living skills.)

Interpersonal Skills (IS)*

1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: speak respectfully and pay attention to others when sharing equipment; Movement Competence: use eye contact, body cues, and words as needed to communicate clearly when sending and receiving objects; Healthy Living: effectively communicate feelings they might experience in response to caring behaviours and exploitive behaviours) 

Student: “I need to make sure my partner is looking at me and has her arms stretched out ready to catch before I throw the beanbag. If she is not looking, I call her name.”

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective group or team members (e.g., Active Living: take turns when using equipment; Movement Competence: work cooperatively to share the space and try not to bump into others when moving around the gymnasium; Healthy Living: listen respectfully to show they care about someone)

Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)*

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking skills and processes to assist them in making connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education (e.g., Active Living: make connections between being active and staying healthy; Movement Competence: use creative thinking skills to come up with new ways of moving and balancing – for instance, balancing on four body parts, three body parts, or five body parts; Healthy Living: make and explain choices that protect them from the sun, such as wearing a hat and applying sunscreen)

A. ACTIVE LIVING

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities and identify how regular physical activity can be incorporated into their daily lives;
A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active and apply physical fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living;
A3. demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in physical activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

A1. Active Participation

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

A1.1 actively participate in a wide variety of program activities (e.g., activity centre and circuit activities, tag games, parachute activities), according to their capabilities, while applying behaviours that enhance their readiness and ability to take part (e.g., joining in willingly, showing respect for others, following directions, taking turns) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “We show respect in many ways. In our classroom, we show respect for people of all cultures and abilities by including everyone in our activities. In our school, we show that we respect the environment by recycling and cleaning up. Showing respect for others is an important part of participating in physical activities. How do you show respect for others when you are being active?”

Student: “I show respect by tagging other people gently when we are playing tag and speaking politely to others.”

A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being active (e.g., having the opportunity to participate fully in all aspects of an activity, having a comfortable environment for activities, being able to explore different ways of being active, having the opportunity to take part in activities that relate to their cultural background) as they participate in a wide variety of individual and small-group activities [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some things that help you enjoy being physically active?” 

Students: “I like it when everyone has their own ball, so we all get to play and practise a lot.”“I have more fun when I have lots of space to run and move.”“I love playing outside. When it is really hot, I play under the trees so I am in the shade.” “I liked this activity because it reminded me of a game we used to play in my home country.” 

Teacher prompt: “Each person pick up a ball or a beanbag. See how many different ways you can toss and catch your object while travelling around the gymnasium. Which way is your favourite?”

A1.3 identify a variety of ways to be physically active at school and at home (e.g., at school: playing actively at recess; participating in a variety of physical activities in class, including DPA activities; participating in after-school physical activities; at home: helping with outdoor activities like gardening, raking, or shovelling snow; going for a walk with family members; playing in the park; riding bikes on the community trail) [CT]

A2. Physical Fitness

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., doing an animal walk, a fitness circuit, parachute activities; galloping to music, wheeling their wheelchair around the gym) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “As you are moving like animals, see if you can keep moving the whole time without stopping. How does your jumping look different if you are jumping like a frog instead of hopping like a rabbit? How do your arms look different if you are showing how you would fly like a bird instead of climbing a tree like a squirrel?” 

Teacher prompt: “When you are exploring different ways of moving using hoops, what do you need to think about as you move?”

Student: “When I roll a hoop, I need to watch out for other children around me so I don’t hit anyone. When I jump into a hoop, I need to be careful not to land on the hoop, because I could slip. If I am holding a hoop with my partner, we should be careful not to pull the hoop and bend it.”

A2.2 demonstrate an understanding of how being active helps them to be healthy [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Your heart is always beating and pumping blood to the muscles and the rest of the body. When you move faster, this will make your heart and lungs work harder, which makes them stronger and healthier.”

A2.3 identify the physical signs of exertion during a variety of physical activities (e.g., heart beats faster, body gets warmer, breathing becomes faster and deeper, perspiration increases) [CT]

A3. Safety

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others during physical activity (e.g., cooperating; listening carefully; wearing appropriate footwear; keeping a safe distance away from others while doing physical activities, either in class or on the playground; staying within defined boundaries; treating their wheelchair as part of their body) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “How do you know that you have chosen a good spot for doing your cool-down stretches today?”

Student: “I can stretch my arms out and not touch anyone or the wall from where I’m standing/sitting.”

A3.2 identify environmental factors that pose safety risks during their participation in physical activity (e.g., extreme heat may cause fatigue, too much sun exposure will cause sunburn, extreme cold and wind chill may cause frostbite, objects on the ground may trip someone who cannot see, wet pavement or floors may create a slipping hazard), and describe ways of preparing themselves to enjoy outdoor activities safely [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “If you are dressed properly, you will have more fun when you are being active outside. What do you need to wear in the summer/winter to participate safely in outdoor activities in any weather?”

Student: “In the summer, I should wear a hat and sunscreen when I go outside. In the winter, I need to wear a warm coat, a hat, mittens, and boots. If I wear a scarf, it needs to be tucked in so it does not catch on anything.”

B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating awareness of the basic requirements of the skills and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities;
B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in those activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

B1.1 perform a variety of static balances, using different body parts at different levels (e.g., low level: crouch with weight balanced on hands and feet; medium level: stand and lean forward with arms outstretched; high level: stretch tall with arms overhead and legs wide apart) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “See if you can make different shapes with your body while you balance your weight on different body parts. Can you balance at a low level? Can you balance while stretching up high? How many different shapes can you make with your body when you are balancing on three body parts?”

B1.2 demonstrate the ability to move and stop safely and in control, with an awareness of people and equipment around them [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Find your own spot where you cannot touch anyone or anything, even when you stretch out your arms. When the music starts, skip or gallop to the music. When the music stops, stop moving and freeze in place as quickly as you can. Stay on your feet and check your spot. Are you still in your own space where you cannot touch anyone or anything?”

B1.3 perform a variety of locomotor movements, travelling in different directions and using different body parts (e.g., jump over lines; walk carefully backwards along a line while looking over their shoulder; move forward with different body parts touching the ground; move arms in different ways while walking, dancing, or skipping; take giant steps while moving sideways) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Each time the music changes, change the way you are moving. Can you run or wheel your wheelchair in a big circle? Straight lines? Zigzags? Can you travel forward? Sideways? Can you skip? Hop? Run? Crawl? Can you make up a new way of moving?”

Students: “Look how I can pull my body along the floor with my arms to move like a seal.”“I am using my arms to make big circles while I jump over all the lines in the gym.”“I can slide sideways taking big steps.”

B1.4 send objects of different shapes and sizes at different levels and in different ways, using different body parts (e.g., roll a ball along a line, throw a rubber chicken underhand to a chosen spot, kick a ball to a specific area, toss or drop a beanbag into a hula hoop, pass a sponge ball over their head to the next person in a short line who passes it between his or her legs to the next person) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Which body parts (hand, foot, elbow, head) can you use to send the ball forward?”

B1.5 receive objects of different shapes and sizes at different levels and in different ways, using different body parts (e.g., catch or trap a ball with two hands, catch a beanbag that they toss themselves or that a partner tosses to them, stop a rolling ball with hands or feet) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “When you get ready to catch, put your arms out with your hands up and your fingers spread wide. When you catch or trap an object, pull it in to your body as you grab it to help cushion it.”

B2. Movement Strategies

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

B2.1 demonstrate an understanding that different physical activities have different components (e.g., movement skills, basic rules and boundaries, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and apply this understanding as they participate in and explore a variety of individual and small-group activities [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What do you need to think about when we are playing tag? What about when you and a partner are playing with a hula hoop – what is different?”

Student: “When we are playing tag, I need to keep moving, watch out for the person who is ‘it’, and make sure I don’t run into anybody else. When I am rolling a hoop with a partner, I need to be able to roll the hoop in one direction and catch it when comes back. I only need to be ready to move if my partner doesn’t send the hoop close to me. I need to make sure nobody is in between me and my partner when I roll it to her, so I don’t hit anyone.” 

Teacher prompt: “When you are choosing a ball to practise throwing and catching, what can you do to play fairly and show respect for your classmates? What about when you are playing with the ball?” 

Student: “When I am picking the ball I am going to use, I can wait my turn without pushing. When I am throwing the ball, if it bounces into someone else’s space, I need to wait until the way is clear before I run after the ball so I don’t wreck their game.” 

B2.2 apply a variety of simple tactics to increase their chances of success while participating in and exploring physical activities (e.g., extend arms to improve stability when balancing on one foot; change speed, direction, or level to avoid being tagged; move closer to a target to increase the likelihood of success when sending an object) [PS, CT]* 

Teacher prompt: “What did you do to improve your chances of success in the activity we just did?”

Students: “I am a fast runner/I can make my wheelchair move fast. I kept moving the whole time so I wouldn’t get tagged.” “I am deaf and can’t hear the music, but I watched for your hand signal so I knew when to change direction.”

* The types of living skills associated with students’ application of tactical solutions differ with the students’ developmental stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater or lesser degree.
In Grades 1–3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills (e.g., understanding that success in an activity leads to increased self-esteem, improving the ability to control their bodies while moving); in Grades 4–6, most students are ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions; and in Grades 7 and 8, most are prepared to focus their energy on the thinking skills involved.

C. HEALTHY LIVING

Chart from page 80 is omitted, text only

Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 1: Key Topics*

Topic
Healthy Eating
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Food for healthy bodies
C2. Making Healthy Choices: 
C2.1 Food groups, Canada’s Food Guide [CT]
C2.2 Hunger and thirst cues [PS]

Topic
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Safe practices – personal safety [PS]
C2. Making Healthy Choices: 
C2.3 Caring and exploitive behaviours and feelings [IS]
C2.4 Safety at school [PS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Potential risks at home, in the community, outdoors [PS, CT]

Topic
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Unhealthy habits, healthy alternatives [PS]

Topic
Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 83) - GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)

End of Chart
* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1–8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 206–207. The topics are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

C1. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development;
C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being;
C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being – how their choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around them affect their own and others’ health and well-being.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

Healthy Eating 
C1.1 explain why people need food to have healthy bodies (e.g., food provides energy for the healthy growth of teeth, skin, bones, muscles, and other body components) 

Teacher prompt: “Just as some toys need batteries to run, we need healthy foods to be active and to grow. How does eating a healthy breakfast every day help you learn?” 

Student: “It gives me energy to help me stay alert and concentrate.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C1.2 demonstrate an understanding of essential knowledge and practices for ensuring their personal safety (e.g., knowing their home phone numbers; knowing how to contact 9-1-1; seeking help from a police officer, teacher, elder, or other trusted adult; knowing routines for safe pickup from school or activities) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Why is it important to know your phone number and your address?” Student: “It is important to know how to contact someone for help in an emergency.”

C2. Making Healthy Choices

By the end of Grade 1, students will: 

Healthy Eating 

C2.1 describe how the food groups in Canada’s Food Guide (i.e., vegetables and fruit, grain products, milk and alternatives, meat and alternatives) can be used to make healthy food choices [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Canada’s Food Guide provides information that can help you make healthy food choices. What does the food guide tell you that can help you decide what foods to eat regularly and what foods to limit?” Student: “The guide tells you what kinds of foods to eat and how much. There are four food groups, and we need to eat foods from all four groups.”

Teacher: “Can you tell me which foods we should eat every day, and which ones we should eat less often?”

Student: “We should eat fruits and vegetables every day. We should eat treats that are not in the food guide less often. Sometimes it is okay to have foods that are not in the guide – like candies, cookies, and sweet treats – but there are also lots of foods that are in the food guide – like berries and other fruits – that are great to have as treats.”

C2.2 know and recognize cues to hunger, thirst, and the feeling of fullness, and explain how they can use these cues to develop healthy eating habits [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What does your body do to let you know you are hungry or thirsty?”

Student: “My stomach grumbles when I’m hungry and my mouth is dry when I’m thirsty.”

Teacher: “What should you do when this happens?”

Student: “I should try to have a snack or a drink when I feel hungry or thirsty.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C2.3 demonstrate the ability to recognize caring behaviours (e.g., listening with respect, giving positive reinforcement, being helpful) and exploitive behaviours (e.g., inappropriate touching, verbal or physical abuse, bullying), and describe the feelings associated with each [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Caring behaviours are found in healthy relationships. How might you feel in a healthy relationship?”

Student: “I might feel happy, safe, secure, cared for.”

Teacher: “How might you feel in a relationship that is not healthy?”

Student: “I might feel sad, scared, angry, confused, hurt.”

Teacher: “What are some situations in which you might feel that way?”

Student: “I might feel that way if someone was being mean or leaving me out, if someone was touching me when I didn’t want to be touched, or if I was left at home alone.”

C2.4 apply their knowledge of essential safety practices to take an active role in their own safety at school (e.g., inform teacher of allergies, be aware of food safety issues, play in supervised areas, follow safe routines for travelling to and from school) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some things that students may be allergic to?”

Student: “They may be allergic to nuts and other foods, bee stings, or medicine.”

Teacher: “What can we do to make the classroom as safe as possible?”

Student: “We should not bring anything that might have nuts in it to school. People with allergies who need to use medicine if they have a reaction should carry their medicine [epinephrine autoinjector] with them. We should know who has an allergy and what the signs of an allergic reaction are, and we should get an adult to help if someone is having a reaction.”

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

By the end of Grade 1, students will:

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C3.1 demonstrate an understanding of how to stay safe and avoid injuries to themselves and others in a variety of situations, using knowledge about potential risks at home, in the community, and outdoors (e.g., items or situations that could lead to poisoning, slips, falls, fire, or injury, including injuries from household products, medicines, kitchen tools and equipment, insecure furniture, candles, toys; road, water, and playground hazards; weather and sun hazards) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What do you do to stay safe and avoid injuries at home and when you are outside?”

Student: “I wear a helmet when I ride my bike. I wear sunscreen and a hat in the summer. I never swim alone. I only take medicine if my parents/caregivers give it to me.”

Teacher: “How do you cross the road safely?”

Student: “I cross where there is a traffic light or a crosswalk, or at a corner. I look carefully both ways to make sure no cars are coming before crossing. I make sure that the drivers can see me, and that I am not hidden by bushes or cars.”

Teacher: “What can you do to stay safe in the kitchen?”

Student: “I make sure an adult is with me when I’m doing things in the kitchen. I do not use a knife or other sharp tools on my own, and I don’t touch cleaners and products that are marked with danger symbols.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C3.2 identify habits and behaviours (e.g., excessive screen time or video game usage, smoking) that can be detrimental to health, and explain how people can be encouraged to adopt healthier alternatives [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some behaviours that can be harmful to your health? What are some things you can do that are healthier or that protect your health and the health of other people?”

Student: “Spending too much time watching television or playing computer games keeps us from getting all the physical activity we need. We can play outside after school instead. Smoking is bad for you, and so is breathing smoke that is in the air when other people are smoking. We can ask people not to smoke around us. It is against the law for people to smoke in cars when there are children in the car.”

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998) (Table from page 83)

OVERALL EXPECTATION 
By the end of Grade 1, students will: 
• identify the stages in development of humans (e.g., comparing physical changes from birth to childhood) and of other living things.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS
By the end of Grade 1, students will: 
• describe simple life cycles of plants and animals, including humans; 
• recognize that rest, food, and exercise affect growth; 
• identify the major parts of the body by their proper names.

GRADE 2

Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided to illustrate the intended learning – the concepts that students should understand and the skills they are to acquire – in connection with the particular expectation. The student responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, or word choice typical of students in the different grades.

LIVING SKILLS 

Student learning related to the Living Skills expectations takes place in the context of learning related to the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands, and should be assessed and evaluated within these contexts.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

1. Living Skills

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

Personal Skills (PS)*

1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own progress, as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: monitor their body’s response to physical activity; Movement Competence: after jumping, consider what they did well as they tried to land in a stable position, and what they could do better; Healthy Living: complete a checklist to monitor their daily care of their teeth) 

Student: “I know I might be moving too fast if I’m breathing so hard that I can’t talk.”

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: dress appropriately for outdoor activity; Movement Competence: describe the value of experimenting when trying new activities; Healthy Living: in response to teasing, try different solutions – walking away, telling the person to stop, telling the person how the teasing makes them feel, getting help) 

Student: “When I’m learning something new and I can’t do it right away, if I keep trying, I always get better. Not doing it perfectly helps me learn what not to do. If I throw a ball and it goes way too far, I know I need to throw a little softer.”

* The abbreviation(s) for the three categories of living skills – PS, IS, and CT – appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, in strands A–C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 18–21 for a discussion of living skills.)

Interpersonal Skills (IS)*

1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: to understand instructions properly, stop and look at the teacher when instructions are being given; Movement Competence: copy a partner’s movements in a mirroring activity while standing face to face by following non-verbal signals and body language that indicate the movements; Healthy Living: effectively communicate their objections or refusal to participate if someone is doing something that they do not like)

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective team members (e.g., Active Living: demonstrate how they can help one another while using equipment; Movement Competence: work cooperatively with a partner when throwing and catching balls and other objects of varying sizes; Healthy Living: use positive language when talking to peers, as part of developing good relationships, and encourage others to do the same) 

Students: “If someone’s ball rolls into my space when I am playing, I stop and give it back.” “If my partner is learning to catch, we will start by choosing a bigger ball or an object with soft edges to make it a little easier.” “I don’t call anyone names, because that can hurt as much as hitting them.”

Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)*

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking skills and processes to assist them in making connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education (e.g., Active Living: explain how participating in moderate to vigorous activity is connected to better fitness and better health; describe what is needed to play safely and comfortably outside in different kinds of weather; Movement Competence: explore the use of many pieces of equipment and explain how each is different and why they prefer one over another; Healthy Living: explain how to stay safe by identifying household products that might be dangerous) 

Student: “I like using the mitt that the ball sticks to better than the scoop, because the mitt makes it easier to catch the ball. The ball sometimes bounces out of the scoop.”

A. ACTIVE LIVING

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities, and demonstrate an understanding of the value of regular physical activity in their daily lives;
A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active, and apply physical fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living;
A3. demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in physical activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

A1. Active Participation

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

A1.1 actively participate in a wide variety of program activities, according to their capabilities (e.g., individual and small-group activities, dancing to music, cooperative games), while applying behaviours that enhance their readiness and ability to take part (e.g., being engaged and moving throughout the activity; knowing what to do; demonstrating appropriate interpersonal skills, such as active listening, communicating with respect, and providing help to and asking for help from group members) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What does it look like when you are ready to participate?” Student: “I am wearing my running shoes, I’m listening to instructions, and I’m excited about doing the activities. I try to find a partner or get into a group quickly.”

A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being active (e.g., having the opportunity to participate fully in all aspects of an activity, being able to choose the activities they participate in and having choice within the activities, having adequate practice time, having access to safe outdoor play space, being able to take part in activities that are connected to their cultural background) as they participate in a wide variety of individual and small-group activities [PS]

A1.3 identify reasons for participating in physical activity every day (e.g., to have fun, learn through play, be with classmates who are involved in after-school physical activities, pursue personal interests in certain kinds of activities, enjoy a change from the classroom routine, emulate a role model, interact with family members, improve health, follow cultural teachings) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Canada’s Physical Activity Guide for Children recommends that children build physical activity into their daily routines to create a pattern that will stay with them for the rest of their lives. The guide recommends that children gradually increase active time and decrease non-active time, including screen time. Why is it important to be active every day? What do you like to do to be active?”

Student: “Being active every day helps to make you strong and healthy. I like to do outdoor activities with my friends or family.”

A2. Physical Fitness

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., playing continuous tag games, skipping, wheeling their wheelchair, using hula hoops) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Today, we will be doing a chair aerobics routine for our DPA activity. We will be starting with slow music, and we will move our arm and leg muscles slowly in order to stretch them and warm them up. We will stretch again during the cool-down after our muscles are warm. How will that help us?”

Student: “Moving slowly at the beginning helps to get our bodies ready for more activity. Then, when the music gets faster, we can really move our bodies to the beat! We stretch at the end because our muscles are warm then and they stretch more easily. We move slowly in the cool-down to relax our bodies and get ready to move on to something else.”

A2.2 describe different types of activities that improve the strength of the heart and lungs (e.g., running, wheeling fast, walking fast, skipping, dancing to music, doing a fitness circuit, other whole-body or large muscle activities) 

Teacher prompt: “What types of activities do we do that make our hearts and lungs stronger?”

Student: “We can make our hearts and lungs stronger by doing activities that make our hearts beat faster and make us breathe hard. Activities like dancing, running, and jumping do that for me.”

A2.3 recognize their degree of exertion in physical activities by using simple assessment methods (e.g., putting their hand on their chest to feel the increase in heart rate as they move faster, using the talk test [monitoring whether they can talk while being physically active]), and identify factors that affect their performance level (e.g., humidity, extremely cold or warm air, poor air quality, personal fitness level) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Think about how you feel when you are active. Put your thumb up if you feel you were working really hard. Put your thumb down if you feel you were not working hard. Put your thumb somewhere in between if you feel that you were in between.”

Student: “I put my thumb at the ‘in between’ spot because my heart was beating faster and I was breathing harder, but I think I could have done even more. I was a bit tired today because I went to bed late last night, so I did not go as fast as I could have.”

A2.4 participate in setting and achieving realistic personal and group goals related to physical activity (e.g., a personal goal of doing a physical activity for a specified period of time, a group goal of completing a collective number of class star jumps in a given time frame) [PS, IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “For the next two songs, keep moving fast for as long as you can. See if you can keep moving in different and interesting ways – galloping, skipping, jumping, wheeling, moving in a zigzag pattern. When you need to rest, walk or wheel slowly, then start moving faster again. Before you start, set a goal for yourself about how long you will try to move. How many breaks do you think you will need to take? What is realistic for you? What will help you achieve your goal?”

Students: “I am going to try to move for the next two songs, and I’ll only take one ‘slow down’ break. I love this music, so that will help me keep going.” “If I am tired, it helps me if someone encourages me.” “I like trying to beat my record.”

A3. Safety

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others during physical activity (e.g., being aware of personal space, making sure their shoelaces are tied, warming up to prevent injury, taking turns when sharing equipment, avoiding overcrowding when using equipment both in class and on the playground, making sure straps are done up before pushing a wheelchair) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “You and your partner are each going to be given a beanbag, a pylon, and a plastic hoop to make up your own game. How will you make sure that both of you have a chance to play safely?” 

Student: “We will make sure that we have enough space around us so that we are not throwing near another group. We will take turns throwing.” 

Teacher prompt: “When you are skipping or hopping in the gym or classroom, what do you need to think about to move safely?”

Student: “I need to keep my head up and pay attention to the people and equipment around me so that I do not bump into anyone. I need to be able to stop in control when the teacher gives a signal.”

A3.2 identify ways of protecting themselves and others, including those with medical conditions, from safety risks while participating in physical activity (e.g., wearing a properly fitting helmet to protect the head, avoiding broken glass on the field or on the playground and reporting it to the teacher, carrying an epinephrine autoinjector if needed, reducing intensity of physical activity if poor air quality causes breathing difficulties, bringing an inhaler if needed, tucking in the tubing of an insulin therapy pump to prevent it from getting caught) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Before we go outside to be active, what do you need to have with you to be safe?”

Students: “I need to have my puffer in my pocket in case I need it for my breathing.” “I need to have my medicine [epinephrine autoinjector] in my pouch in case I get stung by a bee.”

B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS 

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating awareness of the basic requirements of the skills and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities;
B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in those activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

B1.1 perform a variety of static balances with and without equipment (e.g., balance on the floor, on a line, on a bench; balance objects on different body parts), using different body parts at different levels and making different body shapes (e.g., low level – perform a V-sit: balance on buttocks with legs in the air, hold with muscles tight and legs together and arms either supporting the body or held at their sides; medium level – perform a standing scale: balance on one foot with the other leg stretched behind in the air, torso bent forward, and arms out parallel to the floor for balance; high level – perform a standing balance: using a walker for balance, lift one foot or one hand) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Create an interesting balance, with your weight on one or two feet. Now create a balance with one body part touching the floor and another on a bench. How did you change your balance – by shifting your weight, changing your body position, changing the body parts your weight was on, or by using another method?” 

Teacher prompt: “Show me three balances that you can hold steady for ten seconds without moving. Make one balance a low one close to the ground, one at a medium level, and one stretched to a high level. Now make three new balances at each level, using different body parts. What do you need to do to hold your body steady in each position?”

Student: “Squeezing my muscles tight, using bigger body parts, and keeping my eyes on one spot make it easier to balance. Balances where I have my arms and legs stretched out into a wide position are easier to hold steady than ones where I am balancing on one body part or in a narrow position. It is easier to balance in positions that are closer to the ground than ones where I am stretched up high.”

B1.2 demonstrate the ability to jump, hop, and land safely and in control, taking off from one foot or from two feet [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “When you start a jump taking off from two feet, bend your knees and swing your arms forward to help push you forward and up. To land safely, think about putting your body into a position as if you were riding a bicycle. Keep your hands out, knees bent, and head up. While you land, think ‘toes-heels-kneesfreeze’, which means that as you land you should touch the ground with your toes first and then your heels, then bend your knees to absorb the impact, and finally ‘stick’ the landing by holding your position in control.” 

Teacher prompt: “When hopping on one foot, keep your head up and use your arms for balance. Practise hopping with each of your feet.”

B1.3 perform a variety of locomotor movements with and without equipment, travelling in different directions and at different speeds, and using different pathways (e.g., hop sideways across a line, gallop in a curved pathway around trees or objects, skip quickly using a rope, slide or wheel slowly in a zigzag pattern, move at different speeds in response to the beat of a drum, run quickly following a curving pathway, jog slowly backwards while checking over their shoulder) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “In how many different ways can you travel along the lines of the gym? Can you skip? Run? Hop? Use tiny steps or giant steps? Wheel forward and backwards? Go slowly? Go quickly? Go sideways? Jump over lines that cross the one you are travelling on? Can you walk or wheel at different speeds while balancing a beanbag on your head? In how many ways can you move the ribbon as you skip around the gym?”

B1.4 send objects of different shapes and sizes at different levels and in different ways, using different body parts (e.g., slide a beanbag across the floor to a partner; throw a beanbag or ball underhand, using two hands or their dominant hand, and catch it or have a partner catch it; throw a disc through an upright hula hoop; kick a utility ball to a partner; strike a beach ball, using their hands, knees, chest, or foot ) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Strike a ball with your hand so that your partner can catch it in the air. Now strike the ball with your hand so that it rolls along the ground to your partner. Now do the same using your feet. What do you do that is the same in all these cases? What changes when you send a different type of object?”

Student: “No matter how I send an object, it helps to face my partner and stretch my hand or foot towards my partner when I throw or kick, so that the object will travel in a straight line. That works for any kind of object, but bigger objects are easier to hit. Lighter objects move more slowly.”

Teacher: “What part of your foot should you use to contact the ball if you want to kick it along the ground?”

Student: “I should use the side of my foot, not my toe.”

B1.5 receive objects of different shapes and sizes at different levels and in various ways, using different body parts (e.g., stop a low bouncing ball with their hands or feet; catch or trap a beanbag that they or a partner toss, using two hands or their dominant hand) [PS, IS]

Teacher prompt: “In how many different ways can you stop a ball without using your hands? Can you stop it with your feet? Your thigh? Your chest? Your shin?” 

Teacher prompt: “What do you do to make it easier to catch the ball?”

Student: “I keep my eyes on the ball the whole time it is coming to me.”

B2. Movement Strategies

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

B2.1 demonstrate an understanding that different physical activities have different components (e.g., movement skills, basic rules and boundaries, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and apply this understanding as they participate in and explore a variety of individual and small-group activities [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some skills that you might use when you are playing ball with a partner? What do you need to do and watch for when you practise these skills? What changes in a bigger group?”

Student: “When I am playing with a ball with a partner, we can work on sending the ball in different ways – by kicking it, throwing it, striking it, or rolling it. We can also try to receive it in different ways – by catching it with our hands or stopping it with our feet. My partner and I need to stand close enough to each other that we can get the ball to each other. I need to make sure my partner sees that I am going to throw the ball before I throw it. We need to watch out for other pairs of students and make sure we don’t get too close to them. If I’m in a bigger group, we need to make sure that everyone gets to throw the ball sometimes and that we’re not too close together or too far apart.” 

Teacher prompt: “When you are sharing a scooter with your partner, how do you show that you are playing fair? What can you do to follow good playing etiquette?”

Student: “If we are sharing the scooter, we take turns so we both have about the same time with the scooter. When we are finished with the scooter, we show good etiquette by putting the scooter away where it belongs.”

B2.2 apply a variety of simple tactics to increase their chances of success during physical activities (e.g., wheel their wheelchair or run into open space when playing tag games in order to more easily avoid being tagged; choose an object for a throwing activity that they think they can successfully throw and catch multiple times – a cloth ball, a utility ball, a tennis ball, a beanbag; use adapted or specialized equipment, such as a ball with a bell inside that can provide an auditory cue) [PS, CT]* 

Teacher prompt: “When you choose an object to throw and catch, what do you think about to make a choice that is good for you?”

Students: “Catching is hard for me, so I picked a bigger ball.” “I picked a bouncy ball because I like running fast to get it if I drop it.” “I can’t see very well, so I chose a ball with a bell inside. Hearing the bell lets me know where the ball is.” “I use a walker and have a hard time moving around, so I picked a beanbag that won’t roll away if I drop it.” “I picked a stuffed animal to catch because it is fun, and I can practise with my own stuffed animals at home. It is also really easy to catch because it is soft.”

* The types of living skills associated with students’ application of tactical solutions differ with the students’ developmental stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater or lesser degree. In Grades 1–3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills (e.g., identifying what activities they like best and which ones they are good at by experimenting with a wide variety of activities and equipment); in Grades 4–6, most students are ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions; and in Grades 7 and 8, most are prepared to focus their energy on the thinking skills involved.

C. HEALTHY LIVING

Chart on page 94 is omitted, text only
Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 2: Key Topics*

Topic
Healthy Eating
C2. Making Healthy Choices
C2.1 Canada’s Food Guide – healthy growth
C2.2 Food choices (snacks, meals) [CT]

Topic
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts:
C1.1 Personal safety – home and outdoors [PS]
C1.2 Food allergies

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Standing up for yourself [PS, IS] 

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Relating to others [IS]

Topic
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.3 Prescription / nonprescription medicines

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Medication, healthy alternatives [CT]

Topic
Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 98) - GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)

End of Chart
* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1–8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 206–207. The topics are listed on
the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

C1. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development;
C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being;
C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being – how their choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around them affect their own and others’ health and well-being.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C1.1 demonstrate an understanding of practices that enhance personal safety in the home (e.g., observing precautions for answering the phone and door, establishing home fire escape strategies, respecting electrical outlet covers, following precautions for preparing and storing foods, washing hands) and outdoors (e.g., using UV protection; observing safety rules when riding the bus, riding a bicycle, walking to school, approaching railway tracks and crossings; carrying medication for allergic reactions; being cautious when approaching animals) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some things you should do to stay safe when you are at home, outside, or riding on the school bus?”

Students: “At home, you should make sure that an adult always knows where you are when you’re playing outside. You should not touch any household product that has a symbol on it that means danger or poison. You should have a plan and know what to do in an emergency.” “When you’re outside, you should wear a hat to protect you from the sun and a helmet when you’re riding your bike.” “You should sit facing the front of the school bus, and always cross the road in front of the bus when you get off. Don’t get so close to the bus that you can touch it. Get help from the driver or another adult if you drop something in the ‘danger zone’ – the area around the bus where the driver can’t see you.” “If you have a nut allergy, tell your friends and their parents about it when you’re playing at their house. Make sure your snacks do not have nuts, and always carry an autoinjector.” “If you want to come up to an animal or touch it, you have to ask permission from an adult and learn how to do it safely.”

C1.2 identify common food allergies and sensitivities (e.g., to peanuts, tree nuts, milk, eggs, fish) and the reactions they might cause (e.g., swelling, skin rash, difficulty breathing, abdominal cramps, vomiting, diarrhea, coma, death) 

Teacher prompt: “Anaphylaxis is a serious allergic reaction that can be life threatening. Food is the most common cause of anaphylaxis, but insect stings, medicine, latex, or exercise can also cause a reaction. What is the reason for our school policy that asks students not to bring nut products to school?”

Student: “A lot of people have allergies to nuts. If you have a nut allergy, you can have a very dangerous reaction if you eat or come into contact with nuts or something that is made with nuts.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C1.3 describe the difference between prescription medicines and non-prescription medicines, giving examples of each, and identify rules for the proper use of all medicines 

Teacher prompt: “Prescription medicines, such as penicillin and other antibiotics, are prescribed by a doctor and are available only at a pharmacy. How can you recognize a prescription medicine?”

Student: “On the label of the bottle, it has the name of the patient, instructions for using the medicine, and a prescription number.”

Teacher: “How are commonly used non-prescription medicines and health care supplements – for example, cough syrup; vitamins; herbal, homeopathic, and naturopathic remedies; and First Nation, Métis, and Inuit traditional medicines – different from prescription medicines?”

Student: “You don’t need a prescription from a doctor to get them. You can get them in places like health food stores and not just in pharmacies. Traditional First Nation, Métis, and Inuit medicines are usually made from things like plants that grow in the forest.”

Teacher: “What should we do to ensure that medicines are used safely and correctly?”

Student: “You should only take medicine that an adult who is caring for you gives you. You should never share prescription medicines. All instructions, like how much you should take and when you should take it, for all medicines should be followed carefully.”

C2. Making Healthy Choices

By the end of Grade 2, students will: 

Healthy Eating 

C2.1 use Canada’s Food Guide to assess the nutritional value of meals (e.g., in terms of food groups and number and size of servings), and identify food and beverage choices that enhance healthy growth and development 

Teacher prompt: “Here is a picture of a school lunch. What food groups do you see in this lunch? Is this a healthy lunch? What might make it healthier?”

Student: “A healthy lunch has foods from different parts of the food guide. This lunch has rice from the grain products group, a piece of chicken from the meat and alternatives group, and carrots from the vegetables and fruit group. There are cookies for dessert. This is a healthy lunch. If there were also a piece of fruit, or yogurt from the milk and alternatives group, it would be even healthier.”

C2.2 demonstrate an understanding of how to make healthy food choices for meals and snacks, considering the factors they can and cannot control (e.g., the food that’s available in the home; the food that’s available when eating out; energy needed at different times of day; allergies; food guidelines associated with medical conditions such as diabetes or celiac disease; food safety related to food preparation, storage, handling, and cleanliness) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some things to consider when choosing a snack?”

Student: “A snack should give me energy and it should be safe and easy to eat. Snacks with less sugar – like fruit and vegetables – are better for my teeth. Also, some foods need to be kept cold to be safe to eat.”

Teacher: “What can you do if you are going to be somewhere where there are only a few healthy choices or none at all?”

Student: “I should try to make the healthiest choice I can, like having a salad instead of fries at a fast-food restaurant. Or I can go ahead and eat what is available, as long as I don’t do it regularly or too often. If I’m not too hungry, I can wait to eat something healthier later. I can try to bring a healthy snack from home next time, or if my school has a healthy snack program, I can have a snack at school.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C2.3 explain the importance of standing up for themselves, and demonstrate the ability to apply behaviours that enhance their personal safety in threatening situations (e.g., speaking confidently; stating boundaries; saying no; reporting exploitive behaviours, such as improper touching of their bodies or others’ bodies) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What can standing up for yourself look like?”

Student: “You can hold your head up high, make eye contact, and speak strongly.”

Teacher: “In some cultures, making eye contact is considered disrespectful. What can you do then?”

Student: “You can stand up for yourself in other ways, by saying no in a polite but firm way, and not doing anything that makes you uncomfortable. You can also try to stay away from people or places where there may be trouble.”

Teacher: “Why is standing up for yourself important in a friendship?”

Student: “It helps you when you can say what you think or what you need. Friends should listen to each other and show respect. For example, if someone teases me about my allergy to nuts, I can tell them to stop and let them know that contact with nuts could make me stop breathing.”

Teacher: “If someone does something that you do not like, touches you in an inappropriate way, or asks to touch you in a way that makes you feel uncomfortable or confused, how can you stand up for yourself?”

Student: “I can say no and move away. My body is mine. I can tell someone – like a parent, a teacher, an elder, a doctor – that I need help. I can keep telling until I get help.”

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C3.1 describe how to relate positively to others (e.g., cooperate, show respect, smile, manage anger), and describe behaviours that can be harmful in relating to others (e.g., verbal abuse, including name calling, insults, and mocking; deliberately ignoring someone; physical violence, including pushing, kicking, and hitting) [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What does being a good friend look like? How can you show that you’re a friend while working in groups?”

Student: “I can make sure to include everyone, be nice to anyone who wants to be my partner, share toys and equipment, be encouraging, keep my hands to myself, and speak nicely.”

Teacher: “Calling someone a name or leaving them out of a group because of how they learn, speak, or look are examples of abusing or mistreating someone with your words or behaviour. What could you do if you saw someone doing something like this?”

Student: “I could tell the person to stop, or get help from an adult, or be friendly to the person who is being treated badly.” 

Teacher prompt: “Getting help for someone or telling can be a positive or helpful thing. Tattling on someone can be harmful. What is the difference between telling and tattling?”

Student: “When you tattle, you are telling to get someone into trouble. When you are telling, you are telling to get someone out of trouble.”

C3.2 describe methods that may be used instead of or in combination with medication to maintain good health and prevent or treat various health problems (e.g., getting more sleep to help get rid of a cold; getting more fresh air and physical activity to relieve headaches; eating healthier meals as recommended in Canada’s Food Guide; using natural healing practices) [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)  (Table from page 98)
OVERALL EXPECTATION

By the end of Grade 2, students will:

• describe parts of the human body, the functions of these parts, and behaviours that contribute to good health.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS 
By the end of Grade 2, students will:

• distinguish the similarities and differences between themselves and others (e.g., in terms of body size or gender);

• describe how germs are transmitted and how this relates to personal hygiene (e.g., using tissues, washing hands before eating);

• identify the five senses and describe how each functions.

GRADE 3 

Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided to illustrate the intended learning – the concepts that students should understand and the skills they are to acquire – in connection with the particular expectation. The student responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, or word choice typical of students in the different grades.

LIVING SKILLS 

Student learning related to the Living Skills expectations takes place in the context of learning related to the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands, and should be assessed and evaluated within these contexts.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

1. Living Skills

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

Personal Skills (PS)*

1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own progress, as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: monitor their progress towards personal fitness goals, placing a sticker on the Active Living calendar on the fridge in their home each time they participate in a physical activity with a family member; Movement Competence: check whether they feel stable when performing static balances and adjust position if they do not; Healthy Living: identify some of the characteristics that make them unique, and think about things they may have done or said that acknowledged the unique characteristics of others in a positive way or that were disrespectful or hurtful to others)

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: engage in a physical activity when they feel anxious or unhappy, to help make them feel better; Movement Competence: experiment with adopting a positive attitude if they are not feeling confident as they learn a new skill, and describe how doing so affects their skill development; Healthy Living: make sure that they are getting enough sleep and eating healthy food to help them learn and grow) 

Students: “I have a congenital heart disease. I can do most things in physical education. I do my best, but I also understand how much physical activity I am able to do. If I need to adjust, my teacher and I work together to make the activity work better for me.” “I had butterflies about being in the play at the assembly this afternoon, but then I ran a lot in physical education, and I felt a lot less nervous afterwards.”

* The abbreviation(s) for the three categories of living skills – PS, IS, and CT – appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, in strands A–C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 18–21 for a discussion of living skills.)

Interpersonal Skills (IS)*

1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: remind others about safety rules in a positive and supportive way; Movement Competence: talk with a partner to decide which piece of equipment to use and what distance to stand apart from each other in order to practise throwing and catching successfully; Healthy Living: explain to a friend who loves video games how real violence differs from fictional violence, and try to persuade that friend to choose less violent games) 

Student: “Your bike helmet looks like it is sitting on the back of your head. Do you want help with your straps to make it sit straight?”

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective team members (e.g., Active Living: be willing to be anyone’s partner for physical activities and be accepting of everyone when working in small groups; Movement Competence: interact positively with others when sharing space; Healthy Living: show leadership in identifying and avoiding peer pressure) 

Students: “When I am moving around the gym in different ways, I practise being able to move close to others and in my own space, changing directions quickly.” “I don’t think leaving the new girl out is a good idea. I think we should ask her to sit with us at lunch.”

Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)*

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking skills and processes to assist them in making connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, resolving conflicts, and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education (e.g., Active Living: come up with ideas for ways in which they could be physically active inside their family’s house or apartment; Movement Competence: after performing a movement sequence, reflect on what they could have done differently to make the transitions from one movement to another smoother; Healthy Living: plan what they might bring to a family picnic, focusing on local foods, and give reasons for their choices)

A. ACTIVE LIVING

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities, and demonstrate an understanding of the value of regular physical activity in their daily lives;
A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active, and apply physical fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living;

A3. demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in physical activities.

A1. Active Participation

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

A1.1 actively participate in a wide variety of program activities (e.g., tag games, cooperative games, movement exploration with equipment, dance, outdoor activities), according to their capabilities, while applying behaviours that enhance their readiness and ability to take part (e.g., trying new activities, being engaged and maintaining movement throughout the activity, actively cooperating with peers, having the required equipment to take part, accepting and showing respect for others in the group, listening actively, following rules, playing fair) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “You and your classmates will be participating in a lot of different physical activities together this year. Remember, when playing with others, it’s always important to show respect and to follow the rules. What are some examples of showing respect and following rules in your daily life?” 

Students: “We show respect for other people and for things, too. We show respect for other cultures, for our own family and other people’s families, for our friends, and also for the environment. We show respect for other people by working well together at school or greeting people politely when we are introduced.” “We show that we respect the environment by turning off lights when we are not in the room, by not littering, and, whenever we can, by walking, wheeling, or biking instead of using a car.” “We also follow many different kinds of rules at home and in our communities. For example, a rule that we follow to stay safe is to always tell an adult when we are going to play outside, so they will know where we are.”

A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being active (e.g., having the opportunity to participate fully in all aspects of an activity, having support from their peers, being exposed to a variety of activities, being outdoors) as they participate in a wide variety of individual and small-group activities [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What kinds of physical activities do you like best?”

Student: “I like games in which everyone gets to play and people are not eliminated. If you get eliminated, you do not get the chance to play and get better at the activity.”

A1.3 describe the benefits of participating in physical activity every day (e.g., physical benefits, such as better sleep, more energy, reduced risk of getting sick; social benefits, such as improved interaction with peers, greater empathy, stronger interpersonal skills, improved independence; emotional/mental benefits, such as stress release, greater self-confidence, improved concentration) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Being physically active has many benefits, such as giving us more energy to play with friends. What are some other benefits of being active every day?”

Student: “I have so much fun when my friend and I go skating after school. Being active every day helps me feel alert and prepared for school.”

A2. Physical Fitness

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., moving to music at a variety of speeds during warm-up, participating in a variety of dance activities, moving on scooter boards) [PS]

A2.2 identify new capabilities and other benefits that may result from improved cardiorespiratory fitness (e.g., being able to sustain activity over a greater distance or longer period of time, requiring shorter rest periods, feeling better after activity) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “We have been doing a lot of physical activities that work our hearts over the past two weeks. How will continuing to do this type of activity improve your fitness?”

Students: “Physical activity is good for the heart because the heart is like other muscles and it works better when it gets exercise. Today I snowshoed all the way up the hill and didn’t need to stop and take a break.” “I find it a lot easier to push myself up a ramp in my wheelchair since I’ve been doing exercises to build up my arm strength.”

A2.3 assess their degree of physical exertion during cardiorespiratory fitness activities, using simple self-assessment methods (e.g., talk test, breath sound check, increase in heart rate or breathing rate, change in how one feels during the activity) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “How did you check how you were feeling during today’s activity?” 
Student: “I did the talk test. I knew my heart and lungs were working too hard because I couldn’t breathe and talk with my partner while I was running. I needed to slow down for a while to catch my breath.” 

A2.4 develop and act on personal goals related to physical activity (e.g., jumping rope continuously for a specified period of time, doing something active indoors or outdoors with family members on the weekend) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What goal have you set for yourself, and how will this goal help you?”

Student: “My goal is to be able to do all the DPA activities without needing to stop and rest in the middle. When I can do that, I’ll know that I’m getting fitter and healthier.”

A3. Safety

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others during physical activity (e.g., self-monitoring, being in control of themselves and aware of their surroundings, cooperating with others, abiding by rules and playing fairly, communicating positively to help others be safe, using equipment appropriately both in class and on the playground) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What do you need to do to be safe when playing wall ball? When using a scooter board?”

Students: “When I’m playing wall ball, I need to be aware of how much space there is around me and also of how hard I throw. If I throw the ball too hard at the wall, it may come back really fast and hit me or someone else.” “When I’m using a scooter board, I need to be careful not to get my fingers caught underneath. I should always sit or kneel and not stand on the board. I need to keep my hair away from the wheels. I need to stay in control when I move and be careful not to bump into other people or things.”

A3.2 describe how to respond to accidents or injuries incurred while participating in physical activity (e.g., remain calm, stop all activity and hold the equipment, ask an injured person if he or she needs help, tell an adult what happened, avoid crowding the person who is injured) [PS, CT]

B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating awareness of the basic requirements of the skills and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities;
B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in those activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

B1.1 perform controlled transitions between static positions, using different body parts and shapes and different levels, with and without equipment (e.g., move smoothly between yoga positions, from a stork balance to a standing-scale balance, from a knee scale on a bench to a standing position on the bench) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Create a balance by making a twisted shape with your body at a low level and another using a wide shape at a medium level. When you are ready, demonstrate a controlled transition between the two balances. What helps you control the transition?”

Student: “To move in control from one balance to another, I keep my eyes focused on one spot, I move slowly, and I hold my muscles tight. I can move more smoothly if I take a breath before I move, then let my breath out slowly as I’m moving. I also need to think about the order of my movements.”

B1.2 demonstrate the ability to jump for distance or height, using two-foot and one-foot take-offs, while remaining in control (e.g., jump high over lines or blocks; jump far past markers, over beanbags, or into a hula hoop that is held horizontally a short distance above the ground) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “To jump far or high and land safely, what do you need to do?”

Student: “I need to start by bending my knees and crouching, so when I take off, I can push hard on the ground and stretch out my body to get farther or higher. To land safely, I need to bend my knees to cushion my landing and keep my feet apart, my head up, and my arms out.”

B1.3 perform a variety of locomotor movements with and without equipment, alone and with others, moving at different levels, using different pathways, and travelling in different directions (e.g., leap for distance in a zigzag pathway; alternate between walking and sprinting in a warm-up activity; travel sideways, alternately reaching high then bending low to touch the ground; move as close to others as possible without touching them, then far from others to find their own space; skip with a partner, matching their steps and arm actions; make patterns with a scarf; make up a movement sequence in response to action words or words of a poem) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “When you are changing direction or moving around an object, how is your movement different from when you are going in a straight line?”

Students: “I slow down a little to make sure I am in control.” “I hold tight to my walker, look to make sure the way is clear to move it, and then turn it in the new direction.”

B1.4 send and receive objects of different shapes and sizes in different ways, using different body parts, at different levels, and using various types of equipment (e.g., throw a sponge ball underhand and overhand through a hoop with their dominant hand; catch an object such as a rubber chicken or beanbag, using two hands both above and below the waist; throw and catch a ball, using scoops or soft lacrosse sticks, over a line, a low net, or a bench; kick a ball with the right foot and then the left to a partner in a specific targeted area and then receive it back; use specialized objects and equipment to assist with catching, such as a textured ring or ball for easier gripping) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “In how many different ways can you and your partner send and receive a tennis ball over a bench? How about a beanbag? A beach ball? What about when you are using scoops?” 

Teacher prompt: “As you throw to a partner, what are your feet doing?” Student: “I take a step as I throw the ball. If I am throwing with my right arm, I step with my left foot because I get more power that way. Stepping towards the target also helps me to make the ball go where I want it to go.”

B1.5 retain objects of different shapes and sizes in different ways, using different body parts and equipment (e.g., carry a beach ball while running and tag others with it in a game; balance a ball on a racket; hold a plastic ball in a scoop while jogging; control a ball with right and left feet while moving around pylons; bounce a ball using dominant and non-dominant hands while seated or kneeling) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What can you do to maintain control as you are moving (dribbling) a ball with your feet?”

Student: “I bend my knees and use the sides of my feet to keep the ball close to my feet as I move it.”

Teacher: “Can you dribble the ball using both your left foot and your right foot? Why is it important to be able to dribble using both feet?”

Student: “It lets me move in different ways quickly and makes it difficult for others to get the ball away from me.”

B2. Movement Strategies

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

B2.1 demonstrate an understanding that different physical activities have different components (e.g., movement skills, rules and boundaries, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and apply this understanding as they participate in and explore a variety of individual and small-group activities [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “When you are demonstrating your dance sequence to others, what things do you need to think about to make your demonstration most effective?”

Student: “We should have a ‘front’ for our sequence, so our audience can see well. We should have a starting position that we hold still.” 

Teacher prompt: “What skills are you using at each station in the activity circuit? What guidelines do you need to follow so that the activity goes well?”

Student: “We are practising different throwing, catching, and jumping skills at different stations. At the first jumping station, we are working on jumping to touch the wall as high up as we can. At the second jumping station, we are trying to jump as far as we can from the line. There are a few throwing and catching stations where we are practising throwing and catching by throwing through hoops, throwing at a target, and catching with our hands, with scoops, and when holding small nets, blankets, or towels with a partner. At each station, we take turns and share the equipment. When the music stops, we stop right away and get ready to move to the next station. We record how we are feeling and how we are doing on our tracking sheets.” 

Teacher prompt: “When playing a tag game like cat and mouse, how do you play fairly, showing use of etiquette?”

Student: “I follow the rules. If I am tagged, I switch roles to be a chaser without arguing.”

B2.2 apply a variety of simple tactics to increase their chances of success during physical activities (e.g., assume a ready position in preparation to receive the ball when playing small-sided games such as two-on-two or to be ready for a quick start in a race; practise a balance routine on a line in the gymnasium while waiting for a turn on a balance beam or a bench) [PS, CT]* 

Teacher prompt: “What did you and your partner do well when working together in your activity? What could you work on next time?”

Student: “We worked together well when we were playing the ‘popcorn’ game. In this game, you have to try to bounce the balls off the parachute while other people try to keep throwing the balls back onto the parachute. My partner was beside me and we worked well together because we cooperated to lift the parachute, then ‘snap’ it down quickly together to bounce the balls off. Next time, we could work at paying attention the whole time so we are ready when the balls come our way.”

* The types of living skills associated with students’ application of tactical solutions differ with the students’ developmental stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater or lesser degree. In Grades 1–3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills (e.g., working hard during a task, taking a positive approach to trying new activities, understanding that experiencing success leads to increased confidence); in Grades 4–6, most students are ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions; and in Grades 7 and 8, most are prepared to focus their energy on the thinking skills involved.

C. HEALTHY LIVING

Chart from page 108 is omitted, text only
Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 3: Key Topics*
Topic
Healthy Eating
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Food origins, nutritional value, and environmental impact [CT]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Oral health, food choices [PS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Local and cultural foods, eating choices [CT]

Topic
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Safety guidelines outside of class [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Real and fictional violence [IS]

Topic
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Impact of use of legal/illegal substances

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Decision making – substance use / behaviours [CT]

Topic
Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 112) - GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)

End of Chart
* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1–8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 206–207. The topics are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

C1. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development;
C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being;
C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being – how their choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around them affect their own and others’ health and well-being.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

Healthy Eating

C1.1 demonstrate an understanding of how the origins of food (e.g., where the food is grown, how it is made) affect its nutritional value and environmental impact [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What is the difference between processed and unprocessed foods (e.g., processed cheese and a wedge of cheese, toasted oat cereal and large-flake oatmeal, a fruit roll-up and an apple)?”

Student: “Unprocessed foods are foods that are raw or the way they were before they were processed. Processed foods have been changed in some way to help preserve them or make them more convenient to use or easier to sell.”

Teacher: “Processed foods lose some of their nutrients when they are manufactured. How else are processed foods different from fresh foods in terms of nutrients? What is the environmental impact of processed foods?”

Student: “Fresh foods can be healthier to eat. Processed foods have more sugar, salt, trans fats, and other things added to improve the flavour or colour or to help preserve them. The way processed foods are made and the way they have to be shipped can make air pollution and other environmental problems worse. Manufacturing them can also make water pollution worse, and the packaging they come in creates extra garbage.” Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C1.2 demonstrate an understanding of different types of legal and illegal substance abuse (e.g., dependency on nicotine in cigarettes or caffeine in coffee, energy drinks, and colas, or sugar and salt in sports drinks, or alcohol in beer, wine, and spirits) and the impacts of abusing these substances on themselves and others (e.g., dependencies or addictions, financial stresses, legal issues, health issues, environmental issues) 

Teacher prompt: “When a family member is abusing alcohol, there is an impact on him or her, but there is also an impact on others. What impact does it have on others in the family?”

Student: “People who abuse alcohol may not be able to take good care of their families. They may miss important events, spend money on alcohol that is needed for other things, or get involved in arguments. Sometimes emotional or physical abuse happens in families if someone is abusing alcohol.”

Teacher: “Pop and sports drinks are not illegal substances, but consuming too much of them can still lead to problems. What problems might be associated with drinking too much of these kinds of drinks?”

Student: “Drinking too much of these drinks can give you more caffeine, sugar, or salt than is good for your body. Too much caffeine can make you jittery or too excited and may even make you addicted to caffeine. When you are addicted to caffeine, you sometimes get a headache when you do not have the caffeine. Too much sugar can lead to tooth decay. Too much salt makes your blood pressure go up and is not good for the heart. Also, you can get too full drinking these drinks and then not eat enough healthy foods.”

C2. Making Healthy Choices

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

Healthy Eating 

C2.1 demonstrate an understanding of the importance of good oral health to overall health, and assess the effect of different food choices on oral health [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Problems with teeth or gums can be painful, can make it difficult to eat, and can affect our appearance. Oral health problems can also contribute to health problems that affect other parts of the body, like the heart, lungs, and digestive system. We can keep our teeth healthy by brushing and flossing and going to the dentist for regular checkups. Being careful about what we eat can also help. What kinds of foods should you limit? What could you eat instead?”

Student: “I should limit the amount of sugary foods that I eat, especially those like sticky popcorn or candy apples that stick to your teeth. I can eat apples without the candy coating instead, or a piece of cheese, or vegetables such as carrots or radishes.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C2.2 apply their understanding of good safety practices by developing safety guidelines for a variety of places and situations outside the classroom (e.g., guidelines for water safety; safe routes and practices for going to school; home fire safety and emergency plans; safe camping checklists; guidelines for safe Internet use; personal hygiene guidelines; wildlife safety precautions; guidelines for managing allergies; Halloween safety practices; rules for behaviour around guide dogs, other service animals, and animals in general) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some examples of how you might prepare yourself or your family to respond in an emergency – like a fall into deep water or a house fire?” 

Student: “In an emergency, it helps to have a plan. To prepare for an emergency around water, I could learn basic swimming skills, such as finding the surface, supporting myself at the surface, and swimming a short distance. I could also learn about basic boating safety rules, such as wearing a personal flotation device whenever I’m in a boat and staying with the boat if it overturns. To prepare for a home emergency like a fire, I could help make a family escape plan that we could use in case of fire, with escape routes and meeting places.” 

Teacher prompt: “How do you stay safe when walking to school?”

Student: “I am careful when going by driveways and parking lots. I make eye contact with drivers before crossing the road, so that I know they have seen me. I walk with someone else.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C2.3 apply decision-making strategies to make healthy choices about behaviours and the use of various substances in ways that could lead to dependencies, identifying factors that should be considered (e.g., short-term use of medications can be helpful for an illness, but misuse of some medications could lead to dependency or harm; moderated television watching or computer use can provide healthy entertainment or new learning or be necessary to complete school work, but too much screen time can reinforce sedentary habits and inactivity, which can lead to social isolation and increased vulnerability to physical ailments; cultural teachings can provide guidance when considering the impact of using substances) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What can you do to make healthier choices about substances or dependent behaviours?”

Student: “I need to think about what is healthy for me and what could be harmful and also what is legal and illegal. I can collect information and check facts about what I hear. I can find out where to get help if needed. I can pay attention to my choices and my behaviour and think about what needs to change. I can discuss things that are a problem with a friend or an adult and start looking for solutions.”

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

Healthy Eating

C3.1 explain how local fresh foods and foods from different cultures (e.g., berries, curries, chapattis, lychees, kale, lentils, corn, nan, wild game, fish, tourtière) can be used to expand their range of healthy eating choices [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Why is it a good idea to eat local fresh foods when they are available?” Student: “They are more nutritious, taste better, and are better for the environment because they don’t have to be shipped so far.” 

Teacher prompt: “Look at these different versions of Canada’s Food Guide. This one is in English, these have been translated into different languages, and another is for First Nation, Métis, and Inuit users. What is the same about these guides? What is different about the food choices they recommend, and why are they still healthy choices?” 

Student: “All of the guides show four food groups, but the foods in the groups are different. They are still healthy choices because they provide all of the nourishment that people need to stay healthy. The translated versions of the guides all show the same pictures, but the languages are different. All of the guides provide information about healthy choices for different cultures. The First Nation, Métis, and Inuit guide has some different information. The picture on the front shows the food groups as a part of a circle instead of a rainbow. It also shows some pictures of some First Nation, Métis, and Inuit foods, like berries, wild plants, bannock, and wild game, and includes healthy living tips that fit with the lives of First Nation, Métis, and Inuit people.” Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C3.2 explain how the portrayal of fictional violence in various media (e.g., television dramas, video games, Internet, movies) can create an unrealistic view of the consequences of real violence (e.g., physical trauma, chronic disability, family stress, death) [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Watching violence in movies, in video games, and on television might make you think that violent behaviour is normal or acceptable. How is violence in a cartoon different from real life?”

Student: “In a cartoon, characters aren’t really hurt. If they are badly hurt in one scene, they may suddenly be all right in the next. In real life, a person involved in violence can be seriously hurt, physically and emotionally.”

Teacher: “Why is play fighting not a good idea?”

Student: “Nobody intends to hurt anybody in a play fight, but someone may get hurt accidentally. If the person who gets hurt gets angry, then the play fighting can turn into real fighting.”

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998) (Table content from page 112)

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

• describe the relationship among healthy eating practices, healthy active living, and healthy bodies;
• outline characteristics in the development and growth of humans from birth to childhood.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 3, students will:

• outline the basic human and animal reproductive processes (e.g., the union of egg and sperm);
• describe basic changes in growth and development from birth to childhood (e.g., changes to teeth, hair, feet, and height).

OVERVIEW OF GRADES 4 TO 6

The expectations for Grades 4 to 6 build on students’ experiences in the primary grades and further develop the knowledge and skills they need in order to be physically and health literate. Because the base of knowledge, experience, and skills varies from student to student, it is important for instruction to be differentiated to meet a wide range of student needs. The emphasis in the junior grades should be on building students’ understanding of themselves in relation to others.

Student Development and Program Implications

Program design and delivery must take into account the physical, cognitive, and emotional development of students. The following descriptions of the developmental characteristics of students in the junior grades are general in nature, and individual student characteristics will vary depending on the child’s age, sex, body size, experience, and background.

Physical Domain

Students in the junior grades tend to have significant individual differences, reflecting different growth rates and different life experiences. Some may have begun a major growth spurt. Gender-related differences in development are also evident. As they approach puberty, the average weights and heights of the girls will generally be greater than those of the boys. Some students may begin to develop secondary sex characteristics, and some may feel awkward performing skills as they get used to changes in their bodies.

As a result, there is a significant need for differentiated instruction and assessment in these grades. Students in these grades also have more developed locomotor and fine motor skills than students in the primary grades and are developing a greater ability to combine motor skills in sequence. Their bodies are less flexible than those of the younger students, however, unless they work directly on maintaining flexibility.

Programs for these students should provide opportunities to participate in a wide range of activities and should avoid concentrating on only one type of activity, as this can lead to overuse injuries. Providing a wide range of activities also exposes students to new ideas and experiences that may further encourage their commitment to an active and healthy lifestyle. Individual and small-group lead-up activities give all students opportunities to be engaged in their learning. Because of the range of differences in individual development, students will benefit from having a choice of activities or being able to modify activities to suit their varied needs. 

Cognitive Domain

Students in the junior grades show a growing capacity for abstract thought and a greater ability to process visual information rapidly. Their attention spans are increasing, and they demonstrate greater thought retention and increased problem-solving abilities. They tend to enjoy challenges, contests, and intellectual activities. They are also generally less egocentric than students in the primary grades and more conscious of external influences.

Students in the junior grades need opportunities to use their creativity and apply their expanding intellectual capabilities. They like to be involved in making decisions and should be given opportunities to analyse movement and activities, to offer suggestions for improving their skills, to modify activities to give themselves the right level of challenge, and to inquire more deeply about topics that are personally relevant during health discussions. They should have frequent opportunities to question, integrate, analyse, and apply information.

Affective Domain

Peer relationships assume increasing importance in the junior grades. Students are more influenced by their peers and tend to seek peer approval for their actions. They are more likely to become involved in clubs, gangs, and cliques and may sometimes experience tension with adults as they develop closer relations with their peers. They may demonstrate a desire to be popular and to assert themselves and often perceive their ability and success in relation to others rather than themselves. They may be more aware of gender expectations and stereotypes and look to television, movies, the Internet, and the community for role models. Gender relations can become more complex as students develop.

To help students develop their sense of self and an awareness of their own abilities, likes, and dislikes, programs in the junior grades should encourage them to think in terms of self-improvement rather than peer comparison. To help them develop their own rules and value systems, they also need to be exposed to models of fair decision making and be given many opportunities to think about and solve their own problems. Program activities should emphasize participation and teamwork and help students understand the concepts of fair play and healthy competition. Students at this level should be encouraged to ask questions and take responsibility for their learning.

Focus of Learning in Health and Physical Education for the Junior Division

Living Skills

For students in the junior division, interpersonal skills assume increasing importance, and there is therefore an emphasis in this portion of the curriculum on developing the communication skills, social skills, and behaviours needed to work effectively with others. At the same time, students will continue to develop their personal skills, increasing their awareness of self and continuing to develop coping, adaptive, and self-management skills. They will also continue to develop critical and creative thinking skills as they learn to use clear processes for making decisions, setting goals, and solving problems.

Active Living Strand

Students in the junior grades continue to participate in individual and small-group activities, but are introduced to a variety of lead-up activities as well. By examining and understanding the factors that motivate or inhibit involvement in daily physical activity and considering ways of overcoming obstacles to participation, they expand their ability to take responsibility for their own fitness. They are introduced to new concepts, such as the components of health-related fitness (cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, and flexibility) and intrinsic and extrinsic factors that affect exertion.

They also learn to use a variety of self-assessment and monitoring techniques to identify areas for improvement and set more advanced fitness goals. The study of safety expands to include precautions for accident and injury prevention during physical activity and simple treatment procedures.

Movement Competence Strand

Students in the junior grades continue to develop stability and locomotor skills as they learn to perform various combinations of movements and to associate movement skills with more specific manipulation skills (i.e., throwing, catching, and retaining). Through exploration and experimentation in a variety of activities, they acquire an understanding of the movement concepts of body awareness, spatial awareness, effort, and relationship as well as an understanding of simple movement principles, such as maintaining a low centre of gravity, as in a “ready position”, to improve stability. Students in the junior grades learn how to relate these concepts and principles to their movement skills in order to improve the quality of movement. They also learn to categorize games and activities on the basis of common features, and they acquire an expanded understanding of activity components, movement strategies, and the use of different tactical solutions to increase success in physical activities.

Healthy Living Strand

In the junior grades, students continue to develop an understanding of the factors that contribute to their health and the health of others in their family and community, but with a particular focus on choices and decisions connected to their personal health. Their ability to make healthy eating decisions is further developed as they acquire additional knowledge about nutrition and nutritional labelling, and as they learn how to understand and manage their food choices and set healthy eating goals for themselves.

As they become more independent and more responsible for their own safety and that of others, they also learn how to assess risk, respond to dangerous situations, and protect themselves from a variety of social dangers, including bullying, abuse, violence, and technology-related risks. They learn about the hazards of tobacco, alcohol, illicit drugs, and addictive behaviours and develop the decision-making and communication skills needed to resist pressures to engage in risky behaviour. Because students at this age are approaching or beginning puberty, the curriculum expectations provide an opportunity for students to develop the knowledge and skills that they will need to understand the physical, emotional, and social changes that they are experiencing or are about to go through. Topics include reproduction, self-concept, relationships, stress management, and decision making. Students who are well informed, who have had the opportunity to do some thinking in advance, and who have been able to practise the appropriate decision-making skills are likely to make wiser decisions about their health.

GRADE 4

Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided to illustrate the intended learning – the concepts that students should understand and the skills they are to acquire – in connection with the particular expectation. The student responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, or word choice typical of students in the different grades.

LIVING SKILLS 

Student learning related to the Living Skills expectations takes place in the context of learning related to the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands, and should be assessed and evaluated within these contexts.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

1. Living Skills

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

Personal Skills (PS)* 
1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own progress, as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: explain what makes them enjoy their favourite activities, and consider what this tells them about themselves; Movement Competence: identify which skills they perform with the most confidence and which ones are most difficult for them; Healthy Living: set a healthy eating goal connected to Canada’s Food Guide serving requirements for their age) 

Student: “I am nine years old, and Canada’s Food Guide says someone my age should eat six servings of fruits and vegetables every day. I should try to eat a piece of fruit plus at least one vegetable at every meal.”

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: describe how joining a school-wide activity such as an intramural team or club can benefit them; Movement Competence: choose equipment that will help them succeed in learning a skill or refining a skill; Healthy Living: describe how being aware of their feelings can help them adjust to physical and emotional changes at puberty) 

Student: “I am getting better at throwing and catching, so I want to try it now with a smaller ball. I’m picking a tennis ball – it will be a good challenge.”

* The abbreviation(s) for the three categories of living skills – PS, IS, and CT – appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, in strands A–C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 18–21 for a discussion of living skills.)

Interpersonal Skills (IS)*

1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: use encouraging words to support teammates when playing in small groups; Movement Competence: signal with one hand or another to indicate whether they want to receive a pass using their dominant or their non-dominant hand; Healthy Living: identify what a bystander could do or say when someone calls another person names) 

Student: “When you say things like ‘nice play’ and ‘good throw’, it makes other people feel good when they are playing with you.”

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective team members (e.g., Active Living: play fairly by maintaining self-control and sharing opportunities to play; Movement Competence: cooperate with group members to develop a creative movement sequence; Healthy Living: explain what they can do, when sending text messages or communicating online, to avoid saying something that they wouldn’t say face to face; identify some of the teachings of First Nation, Métis, or Inuit cultures that can help them strengthen their own relationships) Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)*

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking processes to assist them in making connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education (e.g., Active Living: think through and apply the steps they will take to avoid injury while participating in a physical activity; Movement Competence: group different games and activities according to features they have in common; explore different body positions [arms up or down, body stretched or loose] when doing a log roll to determine which position works best for keeping the roll straight; Healthy Living: with a classmate, brainstorm ways of avoiding unhealthy behaviours or situations that make them feel uncomfortable, and list healthy alternatives)

A. ACTIVE LIVING

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities, and demonstrate an understanding of factors that encourage lifelong participation in physical activity;
A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active, and apply physical fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living;
A3. demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in physical activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

A1. Active Participation

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

A1.1 actively participate in a wide variety of program activities (e.g., lead-up and small-group games, recreational activities, cooperative games, fitness activities, dance activities), according to their capabilities, while applying behaviours that enhance their readiness and ability to take part (e.g., taking the initiative to be involved in the activity, being open to playing different positions and playing in different groups, respecting others’ ideas and opinions, encouraging others, speaking kindly, maintaining self-control at all times) [PS, IS]

A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being active (e.g., knowing rules of etiquette and fair play will be observed, having the opportunity to think creatively and adapt activities to individual needs or preferences, being physically and emotionally comfortable in the activities), as they participate in a wide variety of individual and small-group activities and lead-up games [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “You want the activity to be not too hard, not too easy, but just right. Can you work in your group to come up with another activity that is just right for you and just right for your group? What makes it just right for you and for your group?” 

Teacher prompt: “Some people like keeping score in activities. In class we usually don’t. Why not? What are other ways to challenge yourself besides keeping score?” Student: “In class we play to have fun and to learn. We don’t want people to be more worried about points than about playing a good game. Keeping score isn’t necessarily a bad thing, but not keeping score can help us cooperate and work as a team, and we can concentrate on using and practising what we have been taught in class. To challenge yourself, you can focus on how well you are playing or how well the team is playing.”

A1.3 identify factors that motivate participation in physical activity every day at school, at home, or in their communities (e.g., enjoyment; availability of programs; proximity and accessibility of facilities such as community centres, lakes, or nature trails; availability of bike racks; support of family and peer group; cultural relevance of activities) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What motivates you to be active at school? What motivates you to be active at home?”

Students: “My friends are joining the new cricket intramural program at lunch. I want to join too.” “At school, having good music to move to during DPA makes me want to be active.” “Our environment club at school is making a school garden. I love being outside, digging in the earth and watching things grow, but I don’t have a chance to do it at home because I live in an apartment. I am active every day as I help with digging and watering.” “My friends and I often cycle on the trails near our house. It’s a lot of fun.” “There is a free drop-in program at our local community centre. I am allowed to go there after school. It’s fun because anyone can go.” “I enjoy dancing and playing games at Friendship Centre socials and feasts.”

A2. Physical Fitness

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., running, wheeling their wheelchair to music, skipping to music, doing light warm-up aerobic activity before stretching, doing parachute activities) [PS]

A2.2 identify how different physical activities affect the body and contribute to physical fitness and good health (e.g., dancing and cross-country running develop cardiorespiratory fitness and endurance, abdominal crunches develop muscular endurance and/or strength, climbing activities develop muscular strength, yoga develops flexibility and muscular strength, proper stretching activities develop flexibility and prevent injury) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Today we will spend a good deal of time stretching during the warm-up and cool-down. However, stretching alone should not be done as a warm-up to an activity, as you could injure your muscles when they are cold. We will begin by doing three to five minutes of light walking, running, or wheeling so that our muscles gradually warm up. We will then slowly stretch each of the major muscles to get them ready for our fitness routine. Which component of fitness will we be working on when we do this, and why is it important?”

Student: “We will be working on our flexibility. Good flexibility can reduce the chance of getting an injury when we are dancing, playing sports, or just being active.”

A2.3 assess their level of exertion during physical activity, using simple self-assessment techniques (e.g., taking pulse rates before, during, and after taking part in physical activities; checking how they feel during physical activity), and explain how intrinsic and extrinsic factors affect the exertion required to perform physical activities (e.g., intrinsic: level of fitness, state of health, energy level; extrinsic: familiarity with the activity; weather extremes such as heat, humidity, or cold) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Compare how you feel before doing the DPA activity and after. What feels different? What affects how you feel when you are being active?”

Student: “I am definitely warmer and more energized after doing DPA. My heart rate goes up during the activity but goes back to normal fairly quickly after. Lots of things affect how I feel during DPA. The more fit I am, the easier it is to do. It gets easier with practice. I have different amounts of energy on different days. If I have had a good breakfast, a good sleep the night before, and things are going well with my friends and family, I feel better overall and doing DPA feels easier. The temperature of the room also affects how I feel. I like doing DPA in a room that is a bit cool.”

A2.4 develop and act on personal fitness goals based on their interests, self-assessments, and feelings when participating in physical activity [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Now that you have participated in a variety of physical activities that focus on your heart and lungs, what goals do you want to set that relate to cardiorespiratory fitness?”

Students: “I want to develop my cardiorespiratory fitness so that I can ride my bike without stopping for an hour and take part in a charity fund-raiser that’s coming up.” “I want to develop cardiorespiratory fitness so I can push my wheelchair for that race.”

A3. Safety

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others during physical activity (e.g., cooperating with others, monitoring their own actions and maintaining control of their bodies and equipment, using equipment such as hula hoops and playground apparatus appropriately, ensuring all chairs are pushed in before beginning DPA in the classroom) [PS, IS] 


Teacher prompt: “What kinds of things do you need to remember in order to participate safely in various physical activities?” 

Student: “If I’m skipping rope, I need to remember that my personal space is much larger. I need to make sure that there is enough room between my classmates and me so that we are not hitting each other with our ropes. If I’m doing activities with a lot of movement, I need to keep my own movement under control so that I don’t bump into other people. If I’m playing floor hockey, I need to use my equipment properly. I should never raise my stick above my waist.” 

A3.2 describe common precautions for preventing accidents and injuries while participating in different types of physical activity (e.g., wearing goggles to protect the eyes when playing badminton, wearing a properly fitting helmet to protect the head, tucking in drawstrings to avoid catching them on equipment or other players, fastening all straps on a hockey sledge, staying clear of mud puddles on fields to avoid slipping) [PS, CT]

B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating an understanding of the basic requirements of the skills and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities;
B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in those activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts

B1.1 perform a variety of controlled static balances and transitions between balances, using a variety of body parts and shapes, at different levels, individually, and with partners and equipment (e.g., balance on a bench; balance with abdomen on an exercise ball; perform a four-point, threepoint, and two-point balance, with weight on hands; stretch to hold a balance while reaching up while their partner holds a balance at a medium level) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “When balancing with a partner, you can create different shapes when you are supporting each other. You can also create interesting balances together when each person is balancing on their own, for example, with one person in a high shape and one person in a low shape. With a partner, create a balance where a total of three body parts between you are touching the ground. How many different three-point balances can you come up with?”

Student: “We can balance with my hands on the ground and one of my partner’s feet on the ground. We can balance with me on my buttocks and my partner on both feet. We can balance with me on one hand and one foot and my partner on just one foot.” 

Teacher prompt: “Check your body position in your plank balance. Make sure your back is straight and your hips are not up in the air or sagging low.”

B1.2 demonstrate the ability to jump and land, in control, from a low height (e.g., jump off a bench and land in a stable position) [PS] 
 
Teacher prompt: “To have a stable and safe landing, you need to lower your centre of gravity and have a wide base of support. Check your position. Are your arms out, head up, feet shoulder-width apart, and knees bent? Did you make a soft landing on your feet? Pretend there are bells tied to your shoes, and when you land, you want to land gently enough so you don’t hear them.”

B1.3 perform different combinations of locomotor movements with and without equipment, alone and with others, moving at different speeds and levels, using different pathways, and going in different directions (e.g., travel under, over, around, and through equipment in an obstacle course; hop and skip in a zigzag pattern, following a specific rhythm; run and leap over a line; use different levels while performing traditional and creative dances; perform t’ai chi or yoga movements slowly and at a moderate pace; wheel their wheelchair through an obstacle course, turn, and wheel back) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Create a movement sequence. Use a combination of different speeds, directions, pathways, and levels. Make sure to consider how you will transition smoothly from one action to the next.”

B1.4 send and receive objects of a variety of shapes and sizes at different levels and speeds, using different body parts and equipment, while applying basic principles of movement* (e.g., balance on the balls of their feet to be ready to move when receiving; step forward with the opposite foot and use the whole body when throwing a ball to achieve maximum force; use a scoop to explore different ways of catching a ball or beanbag; perform underhand and overhand throws with their dominant and non-dominant hands while keeping their eyes on the target; kick or trap a ball at various heights while remaining aware of their surroundings; move their feet and transfer their weight backwards to absorb force when receiving; move arms or legs faster to send with more force; toss and catch scarves in front of their bodies, following a simple pattern, when learning to juggle) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What do you do when you strike a beach ball in order to get it to your partner?”

Students: “I point my striking hand at my partner to help direct the ball where I want it to go.” “I use a wheelchair. I need to position my wheelchair to face my partner before I hit the beach ball. I need to think about wheelchair position so it suits my strength – I might have to move it closer to my partner to make sure the beach ball reaches him.” “I am visually impaired. I ask my partner to clap his hands or make a noise to help show me where to send the ball.”

B1.5 retain objects of various shapes and sizes in different ways, using different body parts, with and without equipment, while moving around others and equipment (e.g., hold a rubber ring close to their body while running; bounce and cradle a ball while pivoting during a rhythmic gymnastics routine; practise keeping their head up while dribbling a ball between pylons or people with their dominant and non-dominant hand and foot; keep a basketball on their lap while wheeling in a straight line; carry a ball in a scoop from one end of the gym to the other while avoiding contact with others) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “When you are travelling down the field with your stick and ball, be sure to keep your head up and plan your route to avoid contact with others and with equipment.”

* See page 26 for background information and a description of movement principles.

B2. Movement Strategies

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

B2.1 demonstrate an understanding of the basic components of physical activities (e.g., movement skills, game structures, basic rules and guidelines, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and apply this understanding as they participate in a variety of physical activities (e.g., lead-up games such as two-on-two soccer, beach-ball volleyball, and small-group keep-away; recreational activities such as scooter-board activities, hula hoop challenges, and throwing and catching a disc; cooperative games, such as keep-it-up, team monster walk, and group juggling; fitness activities such as circuits, running, and flexibility exercises; dance activities such as creative movement, folk dance, and First Nation, Métis, and Inuit dances) [IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “When your group of three is creating a dance movement sequence, what do you need to do to cooperate to create the sequence? What movement skills and concepts do you need to know to do this?”

Student: “To cooperate, we need to respect the abilities of all the group members and choose activities that everyone can do. Different people can do different moves, depending on their abilities. We may have to compromise about what we include, so that everyone agrees on the parts of the movement sequence. We need time to listen to one another, share ideas, and practise together. To put together interesting routines, we need to use our balancing skills and our understanding of how to move in different ways, and also consider how and where our bodies move and how we interact with others.” 

Teacher prompt: “When setting up a game of two-on-two keep-away, what rules do you need to agree to as a group?”

Student: “We need to agree on the equipment we will use and the boundaries, and then on any rules we decide to add, like number of passes, number of steps you can take with the ball, or number of seconds you can hold the ball.”

B2.2 identify common features of specific categories of physical activities* (e.g., individual, target, net/wall, striking/fielding, territory), and identify common strategies and tactics that they found effective while participating in a variety of physical activities in different categories [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Games and activities can be grouped into categories that have similar characteristics. You can use similar strategies and transfer learning from one activity to another in the same category. For example, think of some individual activities that have commonalities. What common strategies might you use in activities like dance, figure skating, diving, and synchronized swimming to refine your movements and develop body control?”

Student: “In all of those activities, you need to have good control of your body as you move. I could work on improving my core muscle strength and body control. I could also get feedback from others and experiment with different pieces of the sequence to get new and creative ideas. I can practise the full sequence so that I can move more smoothly from one body position to the next.” 

Teacher prompt: “The target games of curling, golf, bocce, lawn bowling, bowling, archery, and blind curling all emphasize accuracy and control as you try to get an object as close as possible to a target. What similar strategies might you use in some or all of these activities?”

* See pages 27–29 for background information and a description of various categories of physical activities.

Student: “In all of these games, you have to plan the path to the target. In some of the games, if you are playing against someone else, you can use equipment, such as your ball, rock, or beanbag, to block your opponent’s path to the target.”

B2.3 apply a variety of tactical solutions to increase their chances of success as they participate in physical activities (e.g., individual activities: establish a breathing rhythm when swimming, use a video showing tricks and moves with a skipping rope to learn how to break down a new move into simpler steps; target activities: choose a larger target for optimal success; net/wall activities: assume a ready position that will allow them to be ready to move in a variety of directions to defend a space; striking/fielding activities: throw or kick the ball away from fielders; territory activities: help their team keep possession of the ball by making short passes to teammates in a keep-away game or by changing directions quickly when dribbling a basketball) [IS, CT]* 

Teacher prompt: “Why is it important to be on the balls of your feet and ready to move in a net/wall activity?”

Student: “In net/wall activities, you need to be ready to move quickly if the ball comes near you. If you have your feet moving or are on the balls of your feet, you are always ready to react quickly.” 

Teacher prompt: “Is it a good idea to hit the object to one place all the time in a striking/fielding activity?”

Student: “In striking and fielding activities, it is best to hit the ball to different places in order to keep the other team guessing.”

* The types of living skills associated with students’ application of tactical solutions differ with the students’ developmental stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater or lesser degree. In Grades 1–3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills; in Grades 4–6, most students are ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions (e.g., showing respect and understanding of game etiquette by remaining quiet while opponents take their turn in bocce; cooperating with others to get a ball over a net by striking the ball so others can hit it and moving into position to hit the ball; communicating with teammates; moving with an awareness of others in the same space); and in Grades 7 and 8, most are prepared to focus their energy on the thinking skills involved.

C. HEALTHY LIVING

Chart from page 127 is omitted, text only
Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 4: Key Topics*

Topic
Healthy Eating
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Nutrients

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Food choices – healthy-eating goals [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Food choices in various settings [CT]

Topic
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: 
C1.2 Safe use of technology [IS]
C1.3 Bullying and abuse [IS]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Decision making – assessing risk [CT]

Topic
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.4 Tobacco

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Decisions about smoking [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Short- and long-term effects of smoke

Topic
Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 132) - GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)

End of Chart
* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1–8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 206–207. The topics are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

C1. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development;
C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being;
C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being – how their choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around them affect their own and others’ health and well-being.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

Healthy Eating

C1.1 identify the key nutrients (e.g., fat, carbohydrates, protein, vitamins, minerals) provided by foods and beverages, and describe their importance for growth, health, learning, and physical performance 

Teacher prompt: “Report what you found from your research about nutrients.”

Student: “You can get calcium, which is important for healthy bones and teeth, by drinking milk or a fortified soy beverage and eating dairy products like yogurt and cheese.
“Grains are a good source of carbohydrates and fibre. Carbohydrates give you energy. Fibre-rich foods help you feel full and satisfied, help your bowels function normally, and help reduce the risk of heart disease later in life. Grain products that are lower in fat, sugar, and salt are best. At least half of the grain products we eat each day should be whole grain, like oatmeal or whole-wheat pasta, because whole grains have more fibre. 

“All vegetables and fruits have important nutrients like vitamins, minerals, and fibre. Eating dark green and orange vegetables whenever you can is beneficial. Dark green vegetables have lots of folate and orange vegetables have lots of vitamin A. Folate is especially important during times of rapid growth (infancy and pregnancy), and vitamin A plays a key role in vision.” 

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C1.2 identify risks associated with communications technology (e.g., Internet and cell phone use, including participation in gaming and online communities and the use of text messaging), and describe precautions and strategies for using these technologies safely [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Modern communications technology has greatly increased our ability to get and share information and to communicate with each other. Possible risks associated with communications technology include loss of privacy, addiction, and exposure to sexual predators. What are some things you should do to use communications technology safely? How can you get help if you get into trouble?”

Student: “I should make sure that an adult knows what I am doing when I’m using the computer, the Internet, or a cell phone, so I have someone who can help if needed. When I can, I should use a computer in a public space like a kitchen, living room, or library, instead of alone in my bedroom. I shouldn’t share my password or personal information. I should be aware that people are not always who they say they are online. I should close and delete pop-ups and spam messages without responding. If there’s a problem, I should stop right away and tell an adult instead of trying to solve the problem online. I should help my friends by reminding them of these tips.”

C1.3 describe various types of bullying and abuse (e.g., social, physical, verbal), including bullying using technology (e.g., via e-mail, text messaging, chat rooms, websites), and identify appropriate ways of responding [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What is an example of social bullying? Physical bullying? Verbal bullying?”

Student: “Social bullying could include leaving someone out of the group, refusing to be someone’s partner, spreading rumours in person or online, or totally ignoring someone. Physical bullying could include pushing someone, pulling hair, or knocking a person down. Verbal bullying could include name calling, mocking, teasing about appearance, including weight, size, or clothing, and making sexist, racist, or homophobic comments in person or online. Any of these kinds of bullying could cause emotional pain.” 

Teacher prompt: “Do girls and boys bully in different ways? Is one type of bullying any more or less hurtful than another?”

Student: “It might be more common for boys to bully physically or for girls to bully socially by spreading rumours or leaving people out, but that’s not always true. Social or emotional bullying is more difficult to see but it can be just as hurtful.” 

Teacher prompt: “In cases of abuse, it is not uncommon for the person being abused to know the person who is abusing them. If a friend told you that she had a secret and that she was being abused, how could you help?”

Student: “I would tell my friend to ask an adult that she trusts so that she can get help. I would listen and be there to support my friend.” 

Teacher prompt: “If you are a bystander and you see bullying online, what can you do?”

Student: “I can stand up for the person. I can tell the person being bullied to get offline and try to help them get help.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours C1.4 identify substances (e.g. nicotine, carbon monoxide, tar) found in tobacco products and smoke (e.g., cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff), and describe their effects on health 

Teacher prompt: “What are the dangers of nicotine? What are the dangers of tar?”

Student: “Nicotine is very addictive and is absorbed quickly in your body. The craving for nicotine can make a person very uncomfortable, and that can be stressful. Tar is made up of thousands of chemicals. Many of these chemicals can cause cancer and other illnesses.”

C2. Making Healthy Choices

By the end of Grade 4, students will: 

Healthy Eating 

C2.1 analyse personal food selections through self-monitoring over time, using the criteria in Canada’s Food Guide (e.g., food groups, portion size, serving size), and develop a simple healthy-eating goal appropriate to their age and activity level (e.g., eat breakfast every day; include at least one fruit or vegetable at each meal and snack; help with food shopping and meal preparation at home; plan a meal using the First Nation, Inuit, and Métis food guide) [CT]
 
Teacher prompt: “When making food choices, how do you know how much food you need?”

Student: “Canada’s Food Guide tells us how many servings we need in each food group and how big each serving should be. For example, one serving of grain products could be one slice of bread, half a pita, or half a cup (about a handful) of cooked rice.” 

Teacher prompt: “When setting your healthy-eating goal, what do you need to do to ensure you accomplish your goal?” 

Student: “I need to keep track of where I start and how I am doing. I need to have a plan. I can help to accomplish my goal by talking with my family about healthy eating, learning how to cook simple meals, and helping with making my lunch.” 

Teacher prompt: “Being aware of your eating habits is important. As a Grade 4 student, you don’t always have control over what you eat, but you can do your best to make the best choices from what is available. For example, if you have a choice between pop or milk, you could choose milk. Instead of fries, you could choose a baked potato or brown rice, if they were available. Describe something you have eaten recently and identify a healthier alternative.”

Student: “I ate a sandwich with mayonnaise, margarine, mustard, and bologna on white bread. A healthier choice would have been a sandwich on whole wheat bread or a pita wrap, with either mayonnaise, margarine, or mustard instead of all three of these. Adding vegetables like tomatoes, lettuce, bean sprouts, or cucumbers to my sandwich and having an unprocessed meat such as chicken breast or a bean/chickpea spread instead of bologna would also be healthier. Another healthier choice might be to eat something completely different, such as rice and fish.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C2.2 apply a decision-making process (e.g., identify potential dangers and risks, consider ways to stay safe, consider the pros and cons of each option, consider whether they need to check with an adult, choose the safest option, act, reflect on their decision, consider whether there is anything they could improve for next time) to assess risks and make safe decisions in a variety of situations (e.g., when using a wheelchair, cycling, preparing food) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What safety considerations do you need to think about when you make a snack after school?”

Student: “I need to think about whether food that needs refrigeration has been kept cold and whether my hands, work surfaces, and utensils are clean. I also need to be sure that I know how to use the appliances and utensils safely.” 

Teacher prompt: “Before riding your bike to school, what do you need to think about and what do you need to do to be safe?”

Student: “I should think about what I need to have and how to stay safe. Do I have a helmet that fits right and that’s properly fastened? Do I need to take any precautions because of the weather? What routes can I take, and how much traffic is there on them? How will I carry my books and lunch? Will I be riding with anyone else, and should we ride side by side or in a line? What is my plan if there is a problem, like a crash, or if something breaks on my bike?”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C2.3 demonstrate the ability to make and support healthy, informed choices about smoking, using their understanding of factors that affect decisions about smoking and a variety of personal and interpersonal skills and thinking processes (e.g., applying decision-making, assertiveness, and refusal skills; thinking in advance about values and personal choices; identifying the pros and cons of both making a change and not making a change; being aware of peer pressure; avoiding situations where people will be smoking; using conversational strategies, such as saying no strongly and clearly, giving reasons, changing the topic, making a joke, asking a question) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some examples of things that might influence someone to smoke or not to smoke?”

Student: “Kids might be more likely to try smoking if their friends and family members smoke, or if someone dares them to smoke, or if it is easy for them to get cigarettes. They might be less likely to try smoking if they are not old enough to buy cigarettes legally so cigarettes are harder to get or if they know someone who got cancer or emphysema because of smoking.” 

Teacher prompt: “How is tobacco used traditionally in First Nation and Métis societies? What is the difference between the spiritual or sacred use of tobacco in First Nation and Métis culture and the commercial use of tobacco?”

Student: “Among the First Nations and the Métis, tobacco is often used in small amounts in ceremonies connected to cleansing and communicating with the spirit world. In these cultures tobacco is one of the four sacred medicines (natural tobacco, cedar, sage, and sweetgrass). In its original form, tobacco had a spiritual purpose. The tobacco used in cigarettes and cigars is harmful to our health and not connected to spirituality.”

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

Healthy Eating

C3.1 identify ways of promoting healthier food choices in a variety of settings and situations (e.g., school, arena, recreation centre, stores, food courts, special events; when camping, having a snack or meal at a friend’s house, eating on weekends versus weekdays) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Our school is a healthy school, and we have a breakfast program and a snack program. How do these programs affect people’s food choices? How can the programs promote healthier food choices?”

Student: “The programs give us more healthy foods to choose from. They give all the students a chance to try different kinds of healthy foods that they might not otherwise be able to try.”

Teacher: “If you had to go directly to a lesson or practice after school, what could you plan for a snack that would be healthy and give you sustained energy?”

Student: “If I planned ahead, I could bring a healthy snack like yogurt or a piece of cheese and fruit or cut-up vegetables. If I buy a snack, I need to think about what would be the healthiest choice from what is available.”

Teacher: “What can you do to promote the availability of healthier food choices in community settings?”

Student: “I can ask for healthier choices – for veggie dogs at the arena, for example, instead of just regular hot dogs. If people keep asking for healthier choices, businesses might start to sell them.”

Teacher: “What kinds of things might you consider before inviting a friend to your home for a meal or a sleepover?”

Student: “I would ask if my friend has any food allergies or cannot eat certain foods for religious or cultural reasons and make sure my parents know about these.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C3.2 describe the short- and long-term effects of first- and second-hand smoke on smokers and on people around them 

Teacher prompt: “What are some effects of smoking?”

Student: “Some of the short-term effects can include bad breath and bad clothing and hair odours, and possibly some problems with family and friends, like arguments with parents. Young people who smoke are more likely to be less active, hang out with other kids who smoke, try other drugs, and not do as well at school. Longer-term effects can include addiction, yellow teeth, getting out of breath easily, reduced energy and activity levels, respiratory diseases, and lung or oral cancer. Second-hand smoke makes the air unpleasant to breathe and makes clothing smell. Over the long term, exposure to secondhand smoke increases a person’s risk of getting lung cancer or other respiratory diseases.”

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998) (Table content from page 132)

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 4, students will:
 
• explain the role of healthy eating practices, physical activity, and heredity as they relate to body shape and size;
• identify the physical, interpersonal, and emotional aspects of healthy human beings.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 4, students will:

• describe the four stages of human development (infancy, childhood, adolescence, and adulthood) and identify the physical, interpersonal, and emotional changes appropriate to their current stage;
• identify the characteristics of healthy relationships (e.g., showing consideration of others’ feelings by avoiding negative communication);
• identify the challenges (e.g., conflicting opinions) and responsibilities in their relationships with family and friends.

GRADE 5 

Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided to illustrate the intended learning – the concepts that students should understand and the skills they are to acquire – in connection with the particular expectation. The student responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, or word choice typical of students in the different grades.

Health and Physical Education

LIVING SKILLS

Student learning related to the Living Skills expectations takes place in the context of learning related to the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands, and should be assessed and evaluated within these contexts.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

Personal Skills (PS)*

1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own progress, as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: monitor progress towards fitness goals, noting improvements or lack of improvement and making changes as needed; note how physical activity makes them feel, particularly when they are experiencing stress; Movement Competence: describe how knowing their strengths and areas for improvement can help when they are learning new skills; Healthy Living: describe some of the factors or situations that cause them to experience stress) 

Student: “When I am playing bocce, I am good at planning where to throw, and that helps my team. Also, my aim is starting to improve because I’m making sure to line up my throw and my follow-through with the target.”

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: demonstrate a positive attitude, persistence, and a willingness to seek support when working at developing fitness, and explain how these factors help them meet their goals; Movement Competence: try different approaches, such as adjusting body position or speed, to help maintain control of a ball with their feet while running down the field; Healthy Living: identify how to get help in different situations – in emergencies, when confronted with violence, when being bullied or witnessing someone else being bullied, to prevent injury) 

Student: “When I am dribbling the ball with my feet, I need to move fairly slowly to keep the ball in control. I am working on keeping my head up. As I practise, I am gradually gaining more control and am able to move faster.”

* The abbreviation(s) for the three categories of living skills – PS, IS, and CT – appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, in strands A–C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 18–21 for a discussion of living skills.)

Interpersonal Skills (IS)*

1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: warn others and report to the teacher if any equipment is broken or unsafe to use; Movement Competence: when working with a partner to create a developmental gymnastics sequence, listen to their partner and share ideas for ways to improve the sequence; Healthy Living: practise using refusal skills if presented with choices or peer pressure regarding use of alcohol or tobacco)

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective team members (e.g., Active Living: demonstrate leadership skills by taking turns leading warm-up activities; Movement Competence: collaborate with teammates to plan how to move the ball up the field, then follow through with the plan; Healthy Living: show respect for others by giving classmates encouragement and praise and by avoiding behaviours such as calling people names or excluding them; show respect for cultural diversity) 

Student: “Our plan to keep the ball away from the other team didn’t work. I think we need to work on using shorter passes to try to hold on to the ball.”

Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)*

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking skills and processes to assist them in making connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education (e.g., Active Living: make connections between being active and working towards personal fitness goals; Movement Competence: explain the idea of “healthy competition”, what it involves and what it should not involve, and how the presence or absence of those features might affect participation in physical activity; explore how using different speeds and pathways can enhance a dance sequence; Healthy Living: describe how the media can influence their food choices)

A. ACTIVE LIVING

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities, and demonstrate an understanding of factors that encourage lifelong participation in physical activity;

A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active, and apply physical fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living;

A3. demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in physical activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

A1. Active Participation

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

A1.1 actively participate in a wide variety of program activities (e.g., lead-up games, recreational activities, fitness and endurance activities, dance), according to their capabilities, while applying behaviours that enhance their readiness and ability to take part (e.g., encouraging others with positive comments, displaying fair play by respecting the decisions of others) [PS, IS]

A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being active (e.g., having the opportunity to modify games to make them more inclusive and to increase opportunities for participation, being exposed to new and different activities such as rubber chicken tag, having the opportunity to respond creatively to music and poetry, being able to take part in activities that emphasize healthy competition with themselves and others, having access to play spaces that are clean and attractive), as they participate in a wide variety of individual and small-group activities and lead-up games [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What can you do to keep school and community play spaces clean, tidy, and attractive so that you can enjoy being physically active outside?” Student: “We can get the school or community to put garbage and recycling containers in the area, use them ourselves, and encourage others to use them. We could also volunteer to plant trees. Trees provide shady places where we can go to keep cool.”

A1.3 identify factors that can either motivate or make it difficult for people to be physically active every day (e.g., enjoyment; level of peer support; availability of transportation, equipment, time, and financial resources; availability of community resources; gender barriers or expectations; personal abilities; accessibility of facilities; personal organizational skills; family responsibilities or curfews), and describe ways of overcoming obstacles to staying active [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Identify a challenge that might make it difficult to be active every day and offer a solution that could help.” Students: “I have to take care of my younger brother every day after school, so I cannot join an after-school club. Instead, I play outside with my brother at home and sometimes invite a friend to join us.” “I would like to play in a hockey league, but my family does not have time to drive me to the practices and the equipment is too expensive. Instead, I play road hockey with my friends and family after school and on the weekends.” “I want to join an after-school club, but my parents are concerned about me getting home safely. I’m going to suggest asking my friend to join the club too, so we can walk home or take the bus together.”

A2. Physical Fitness

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., power walking, wheeling, playing three-onthree games, skipping rope) [PS]

A2.2 identify the components of health-related fitness (e.g., cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility) and the benefits associated with developing and maintaining each of them (e.g., increased cardiorespiratory endurance provides more stamina for prolonged activity, increased muscular strength and muscular endurance improve performance in activities, good flexibility allows for ease of movement during activities) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Today, you will be doing a variety of fitness activities in this circuit. What is the purpose of each of the different activities?”

Student: “Doing the activities in this fitness circuit helps us work on different areas of fitness. The wall push-ups and crunches help us develop our arm and abdominal muscles. The continuous skipping will help build our cardiorespiratory fitness, and the stretching in the cool-down helps our flexibility when we do bending, twisting, and reaching activities.”

A2.3 assess a specific component of their health-related fitness by noting physical responses during various physical activities, and monitor changes over time [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Record your pulse before, during, and after the activity. Also, record how you felt. Keep track of the number of steps you take during the day, when you are wearing the pedometer. Come back to this information next week and the following week and comment on any changes you see.”

Student: “I can see that my heart rate goes up during the activity and back down afterwards. I am starting to feel less tired when I move without stopping for twenty minutes. My heart rate recovers to a normal range more quickly. I have been tracking the number of steps I take with my pedometer, and I’ve been able to increase from ten thousand steps in a day to over fifteen thousand on some days.”

A2.4 develop and implement personal plans relating to a specific component of health-related fitness, chosen on the basis of their personal fitness assessments and interests [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What do you need to consider when setting your physical fitness and activity goal?”

Student: “I need to consider which aspect of my fitness I want to improve, assess where I am now, and decide what I will do to reach the level I want to be at. I want to be able to throw farther, so I need to improve my upper-body strength. I can do five push-ups now, but I want to be able to do ten by the end of the month. I can do that by trying to increase the number of push-ups I do every couple of days.”

A3. Safety

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others during physical activity (e.g., demonstrating personal responsibility for safety, using proper stretching techniques during cool-down activities, ensuring their actions promote a positive emotional experience for themselves and others, reporting any equipment that is not in good working condition) [PS, IS]

Teacher prompt: “What safety considerations do you need to remember when playing touch football with your friends?” Student: “We need to be in control when we tag and we shouldn’t tackle or push.” 

Teacher prompt: “If a peer is trying a new skill for the first time, what can you do to help that person feel safe or more comfortable in performing the skill in front of the group?”

Student: “I can try to be supportive by making encouraging comments and not being disruptive. I can also be a role model by trying new and challenging things myself.”

A3.2 demonstrate an understanding of proactive measures that should be taken to minimize environmental health risks that may interfere with their safe participation in and enjoyment of outdoor physical activities (e.g., drinking fluids to avoid dehydration, before, during, and after vigorous activities; applying sunscreen and wearing a hat and sunglasses to protect the skin and eyes from sun damage; checking weather reports for the humidex, wind chill, air quality index, and UV index to determine what preparations may be needed to be safe and comfortable outdoors; bringing inhalers and epinephrine autoinjectors if needed; reading warning signs posted in recreational areas) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Using ‘active transportation’ means using muscle power instead of vehicles to get ourselves around. It helps to reduce air pollution. When using active transportation, what can you do to keep yourself safe?”

Student: “I can travel with a buddy or a group because there’s safety in numbers. When I’m biking, walking, or skateboarding, I can follow the rules of the road and also use trails or side streets instead of the main roads whenever I can. That way, I avoid the dangers of travelling in traffic and I don’t have to breathe in the exhaust from cars.”

B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating an understanding of the basic requirements of the skills and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities;
B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in those activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

B1.1 perform controlled transfers of weight in a variety of situations involving static and dynamic balance, using changes in speed and levels, with and without equipment (e.g., perform a sequence of movements on a floor line or a bench; stay in control while rolling, balancing, twisting, dodging, jumping, skipping quickly and slowly) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “How do you keep your balance when changing speed or levels?” Students: “When I am speeding up while skating, I keep my balance by keeping my knees bent and my body low.” “When I am contracting from a high balance to a low balance, my movement needs to be quick and firm, and I need to keep my core muscles tight to help maintain my balance.”

B1.2 demonstrate the ability to jump in control for height or distance, using a variety of body actions (e.g., push off strongly during take-off when jumping for height; keep a tight body position when turning in the air; land smoothly and safely after a vertical jump and half turn in a dance sequence; maintain body control when landing after a long jump) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “When you are in the air, squeeze your muscles so your body stays in control.” 

Teacher prompt: “When you are landing after a long jump or a jump from a height, what do you need to do to maintain control?”

Student: “When the jump is an especially big one, I need to land on the balls of my feet and bend my knees more than usual to absorb the force of landing and keep my balance. I also need to keep my arms out and my head up.”

B1.3 explore different combinations of locomotor movements with and without equipment, alone and with others, moving at different speeds and levels, and using different pathways (e.g., dodge or change speed or direction to avoid people or objects; incorporate different movements at varying speeds when creating a dance with a partner; use ribbons or balls to develop a movement sequence that includes jumps, turns, movements in different directions, and balances) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Try the movement sequence at full speed, then very slowly. Which movements are easier to do faster and which ones are easier to do more slowly?”

Student: “For some of the moves, like footwork with complicated steps, going slowly gives me time to do the sequence well. For other moves, like a transition from a low balance to a stretched shape, moving more slowly is more difficult because I need good body control to hold the position steady as I move.”

B1.4 send and receive objects using different body parts and equipment, adjusting for speed, while applying basic principles of movement* (e.g., kick a ball with the inside of their dominant foot at varying speeds to a partner who absorbs the ball with his/her body when it is received; strike a beach ball with a hand paddle and follow through in the direction of the intended target; experiment with using different amounts of force to send at different speeds) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What do you need to do to throw an object faster? When catching an object, how do you adjust for different speeds?”

Student: “To throw faster, I need to put my whole body into the throw, stepping with the opposite foot, turning my body, and following through with my arm after I release the ball. When I am catching, I need to keep my eyes on the ball. If the ball is coming slowly, I can step towards it to catch it. If it is coming fast, I need to be ready to absorb the catch with my body so the ball does not bounce away from me. I do the same things if I am receiving with my feet.”

B1.5 retain objects with and without equipment in a variety of situations while moving in different pathways around others and equipment (e.g., dribble a ball around pylons, slowing down as needed to maintain control; stickhandle a felt disc towards a goal or target while shifting the direction of forward movement to avoid defenders or obstacles; catch and carry a ball in a scoop) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “How do you maintain control of the ball when you are moving in a zigzag pattern down the field? Does that change when your speed changes?”

Student: “I need to keep the ball fairly close to my foot or stick to control it. I can let it get a bit farther away when I am moving faster.”

B2. Movement Strategies

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

B2.1 demonstrate an understanding of the components of physical activities (e.g., movement skills, game structures, rules and guidelines, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and apply this understanding as they participate in a variety of physical activities (e.g., lead-up games such as three-on-three lacrosse, mini tennis, and keep-it-up; recreational activities such as disc golf, parachute activities, orienteering, and cooperative games; fitness activities such as yoga, isometric musclebuilding activities, and endurance activities; dance activities such as creative movement, hip hop, and novelty dances) [IS, CT] 

* See page 26 for background information and a description of movement principles.

Teacher prompt: “How is a lead-up game such as four-corner soccer structured to make sure the game is inclusive and works for everyone?”

Student: “A game like four-corner soccer has four different goals and several balls so everyone has lots of opportunities to play. People with different skill levels can play together and everyone has a chance to participate to the best of their ability.”

Teacher: “If we are striving for healthy competition when playing, what does that look like?”

Student: “With healthy competition, everyone is trying their best, supporting each other, and playing fairly. You don’t always have to be in a game situation to compete. For example, I might compete against myself, trying to keep a soccer ball going as I juggle it, hitting it up with my foot, chest, and head.”

Teacher: “What components of an activity could be adjusted to make it challenging and enjoyable for everyone?” Student: “We could change the boundaries to make the game either easier or harder. We could change the type of equipment we use. We could add a rule – for example, all players have to touch the beach ball once before we are allowed to try to score a point. When we are playing with someone who is blind or partially sighted, we can use a ball with a bell inside or make a sound when sending the object so the person who cannot see is able to hear where the object is.”

B2.2 describe common features of specific categories of physical activities* (e.g., individual, target, net/wall, striking/fielding, territory), and describe strategies that they found effective while participating in a variety of physical activities in different categories [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “The net/wall games of volleyball, wall ball, badminton, squash, table tennis, paddleball, and wheelchair tennis all emphasize moving and controlling an object in a confined space and hitting it over a net or to a wall. What strategies might work in all of these activities?”

Student: “In all of these games, you try to place the object in a spot where the other team or player will have trouble returning it. You need to be ready to move quickly so you can return the object if it comes near you.” 

Teacher prompt: “Consider what is similar about activities like cross-country running or skiing, orienteering, long-distance running in track, and power walking. What strategies might you use in all of these activities?”

Student: “These activities all involve being able to keep going for a long period of time. Most of them don’t need a lot of equipment and can be done anywhere. These activities help build your level of fitness and endurance. A strategy you would use in all of these activities is pacing. It helps to learn how to manage your energy so you can keep going and be able to finish and also have the ability to go faster at different parts of the course.” 

* See pages 27–29 for background information and a description of various categories of physical activities.

B2.3 apply a variety of tactical solutions to increase their chances of success as they participate in physical activities (e.g., individual activities: interpret feedback from a partner and adjust their position in a yoga activity; target activities: choose an appropriate distance from the target to maximize level of challenge and opportunity for success; work on accuracy by maintaining eye contact with the target and following through in the direction of the target; net/wall activities: place shots away from their opponent; striking/fielding activities: choose their position to effectively cover a space when fielding; territory activities: make quick passes to keep the object moving when playing a modified team handball game) [IS, CT]* 

Teacher prompts: “In target games, choose a position (closer to or farther from the target) that will give you the best balance between optimal challenge and the greatest chance of success.” “Why is it important to communicate with your teammates during territory activities?” “What do you need to do to work well with others when creating and performing a creative dance in a group of four?”

* The types of living skills associated with students’ application of tactical solutions differ with the students’ developmental stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater or lesser degree. In Grades 1–3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills; in Grades 4 –6, most students are ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions (e.g., showing respect for others by not talking when others are aiming and taking their turn, communicating effectively with teammates during play, being aware of others’ positions); and in Grades 7 and 8, most are able to focus their energy on the thinking skills involved.

C. HEALTHY LIVING

Chart on page 143 is omitted, text only
Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 5: Key Topics*

Topic
Healthy Eating
C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Nutrition facts tables, food labels [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Media influences – food choices [CT]


Topic
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Supports – injury prevention, emergencies, bullying, violence [PS]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Strategies – threats to personal safety [PS, IS, CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Actions, self-concept [PS, IS]


Topic
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Short- and long-term effects of alcohol use

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Refusal skills – alcohol use and other behaviours [IS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.3 Decision to drink alcohol, influences [CT]

Topic
Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 147) - GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)

End of Chart
* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1–8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 206–207. The topics are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

C1. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development;
C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being;
C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being – how their choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around them affect their own and others’ health and well-being.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C1.1 identify people (e.g., parents, guardians, neighbours, teachers, crossing guards, police, older students, coaches, elders) and supportive services (e.g., help lines, 9-1-1, Telehealth, public health units, student services) that can assist with injury prevention, emergencies, bullying, and abusive and violent situations [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “If you are being bullied or you know of someone being bullied, to whom can you turn for help?”

Student: “I can turn to any adult I trust – a parent, a teacher, a coach, or an elder. I need to continue to ask for help until I get the help I need.”

Teacher: “What should you do in a situation in which someone is being violent?” Student: “Get out of the way, get help, and do not try to intervene directly.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C1.2 describe the short- and long-term effects of alcohol use, and identify factors that can affect intoxication (e.g., amount consumed, speed of consumption, sex, body size, combinations with other drugs or food, emotional state) 

Teacher prompt: “Drinking even a small amount of alcohol can affect your body. The more you drink, the greater the effects. What are the short-term effects of alcohol use?”

Student: “Short-term effects can include relaxation but also reduced coordination, higher body temperature, slower reflexes, drowsiness, lowered inhibitions, slurred speech, and problems making good decisions. Becoming drunk, or intoxicated, could lead to vomiting, loss of consciousness, or even alcohol poisoning. If any of these things happen, medical attention is needed.”

Teacher: “What long-term consequences can result from alcohol abuse?”

Student: “Addiction, liver damage, financial problems, family or relationship issues, and emotional problems are some of the consequences of long-term alcohol abuse.”

C2. Making Healthy Choices

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

Healthy Eating

C2.1 explain how to use nutrition facts tables and ingredient lists on food labels to make healthier personal food choices [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Food labels contain a lot of information, including the product name, product claims, an ingredient list, and a nutrition facts table, which identifies the nutrients in the product, the number of calories per serving, the serving size, and other information, such as the amount of trans fats. How can you use this information to evaluate food choices?”

Student: “I can check the nutrition facts table to see how much fat, sugar, and salt is in the product. Foods with less saturated fat, trans fats, salt, and sugar are better than those with more. However, growing bodies do need a certain amount of fat for healthy growth. Foods with more nutrients like fibre and vitamins A and C are healthier than those with smaller amounts of these nutrients. I can use this knowledge to help me make healthier food choices at home and to help my family make healthier choices when we go shopping – for example, by choosing 100% fruit juice instead of fruit-flavoured drinks. I can also use similar information about the ingredients in food at restaurants and fast-food places, if it is available.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C2.2 demonstrate the ability to deal with threatening situations by applying appropriate living skills (e.g., personal skills, including self-monitoring and anger management; interpersonal skills, including conflict resolution skills; communication skills, including assertiveness and refusal skills) and safety strategies (e.g., having a plan and thinking before acting; looking confident; being aware of surroundings; seeking help; drawing on cultural teachings, where appropriate, to analyse situations and develop responses) [PS, IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What strategies could you use in a situation where you were being harassed because of your sex, race, religion, sexual orientation, body shape, weight, or ability?”

Student: “Different situations may require different strategies. Sometimes it is best to be assertive and stand up to the person who is harassing by speaking confidently. If you feel threatened, it is safer to avoid confrontation by ignoring the person, making an excuse and walking away, or getting help.” 

Teacher prompt: “As a bystander, what could you do to help if a friend tells you about a situation where he or she is feeling bullied or unsafe?”

Student: “I can listen to my friend and talk about ways we can stand up for ourselves when someone is bullying us. I can stand up for my friend if I am there when it happens, or I can get help by telling an adult.” 

Teacher prompt: “How might the medicine wheel concept, which is used in some First Nation teachings, help you to consider strategies for personal safety?”

Student: “The four elements of the medicine wheel can help me think about my safety and well-being in terms of my physical, emotional, spiritual, and mental health.” Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C2.3 demonstrate the ability to apply decision-making, assertiveness, and refusal skills to deal with pressures pertaining to alcohol use or other behaviours that could later lead to addiction (e.g., smoking, drug use, gambling) [IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What might you do if someone is pressuring you to try alcohol or a cigarette?”

Student: “I can try to avoid situations where I might be offered alcohol or cigarettes. If I can’t, I can say strongly and clearly that I do not want to participate. I can also mention problems that I’d rather avoid, like bad breath, disease, and impairment – or I can just make a joke and change the subject.”

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

Healthy Eating

C3.1 describe how advertising and media influences affect food choices (e.g., TV commercials, product packaging, celebrity endorsements, product placements in movies and programs, idealized body images in movies and programs, magazine articles promoting fad diets), and explain how these influences can be evaluated to make healthier choices (e.g., critically examining the reasons for celebrity endorsements or the plausibility of product claims, checking whether there is information in the advertisement that verifies the claims, asking for information about product ingredients and nutrients, critically examining the reality and healthiness of idealized body images in the media, evaluating diet plans against accepted nutritional criteria such as those used in Canada’s Food Guide) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What might you think about when you see a professional athlete drinking an energy drink in a commercial?”

Student: “The advertisement is trying to influence me to buy the drink. But just because the ad says a professional athlete drinks it does not mean that it is healthy for me or that I need to drink it when I am being active.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C3.2 explain how a person’s actions (e.g., negative actions such as name calling, making homophobic or racist remarks, mocking appearance or ability, excluding, bullying, sexual harassment; positive actions such as praising, supporting, including) can affect the feelings, self-concept, emotional well-being, and reputation of themselves and others [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Negative actions that hurt the feelings of others can also result in stigma. When someone appears to be different from us, whether it is because of something visible like a physical disability or something invisible like having an illness such as schizophrenia or HIV/AIDS, we may view him or her in a stereotyped manner and make assumptions. Stereotypes can have a strong, negative impact on someone’s self-concept and well-being. On the other hand, you can also make a big difference in a positive way with your actions. Give an example of an action that can affect someone’s feelings, self-concept, or reputation in a positive way.”

Student: “Actions that can have a positive effect include asking someone who has been left out to be a partner, praising someone for their accomplishments, recognizing someone’s talent or skill, and making sure everyone gets a turn.”

Teacher: “How do your actions – positive or negative – have an impact on your own self-concept and reputation?”

Student: “Having a positive attitude towards other people can make you feel good about yourself. It can also make people want to be around you. Always being negative or putting other people down reflects badly on you and can make you feel worse about yourself.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C3.3 identify personal and social factors (e.g., emotional, physical, mental, spiritual, cultural, legal, media, and peer influences) that can affect a person’s decision to drink alcohol at different points in his or her life [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How realistic are the messages that we get from the media about drinking alcohol?”

Student: “On television, you see people having fun, being sociable, and doing cool things while drinking. You do not often see images in the media of someone who has passed out or who has caused a car crash or who is in an abusive relationship because of alcohol.” 

Teacher prompt: “Some adults choose to drink alcohol in social settings or during celebrations. How is this different from a teen drinking alcohol?”

Student: “It is legal for adults to drink alcohol. Drinking in moderation, avoiding getting drunk, and following the law about drinking and driving are some of the responsibilities that adults who choose to drink alcohol have to accept.”

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998) (Table content page 147)

OVERALL EXPECTATION

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

• describe physical, emotional, and interpersonal changes associated with puberty

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 5, students will:

• identify strategies to deal positively with stress and pressures that result from relationships with family and friends; 
• identify factors (e.g., trust, honesty, caring) that enhance healthy relationships with friends, family, and peers; 
• describe the secondary physical changes at puberty (e.g., growth of body hair, changes in body shape);
• describe the processes of menstruation and spermatogenesis;
• describe the increasing importance of personal hygiene following puberty.

GRADE 6

Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided to illustrate the intended learning – the concepts that students should understand and the skills they are to acquire – in connection with the particular expectation. The student responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, or word choice typical of students in the different grades.

LIVING SKILLS

Student learning related to the Living Skills expectations takes place in the context of learning related to the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands, and should be assessed and evaluated within these contexts.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

1. Living Skills

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

Personal Skills (PS)*

1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own progress, as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: identify which of the factors known to motivate participation in physical activity in most people are the strongest factors affecting their own motivation to be active; Movement Competence: assess their technique for catching throws of different speeds – are they remembering to move farther away when a ball is thrown hard and fast?; Healthy Living: reflect on how their body image affects their self-concept, and identify other factors, including acceptance by others, that influence their sense of themselves)

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: explain why properly fitted helmets and well-secured straps on wheelchairs allow them to participate in physical activities with greater confidence; Movement Competence: explain how adopting a positive attitude and a willingness to try new things helped them have more fun and make progress in learning a new skill or game; Healthy Living: describe how their management and organizational skills are applied when they are preparing to babysit a younger child) 

Student: “When I am preparing to babysit, I always make sure I have the emergency contact information for the parents before I leave. I check to make sure I know what rules and guidelines they expect the children to follow. I also make sure I have a plan to get immediate help if I need it.”

* The abbreviation(s) for the three categories of living skills – PS, IS, and CT – appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, in strands A–C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 18–21 for a discussion of living skills.)

Interpersonal Skills (IS)*

1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: use encouraging words to support other students when being active; Movement Competence: communicate clearly when working together in small groups to create a movement sequence; Healthy Living: describe what verbal and non-verbal signals could be used to send messages to others about how you feel about them)

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective team members (e.g., Active Living: promote fair play, share equipment, take turns, and follow rules when playing lead-up games; show respect for the decisions and calls of teammates when refereeing their own activities; Movement Competence: contribute ideas when working in a group to accomplish a collaborative task; Healthy Living: show awareness of how best to help others by asking questions and responding as directed by the person) 

Students: “Here is a plan: If the ball is hit to left field, I’ll run and get the ball. You run and cover my spot. I’ll throw the ball to you. You throw the ball in to the infield. What do you think of that plan?” “I saw someone with crutches trying to go up the stairs. I asked them if they wanted help instead of assuming that they needed help, because they might have been trying to do it on their own.”

Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)*

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking skills and processes to assist them in making connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education (e.g., Active Living: describe the steps that should be taken when responding to minor injuries; Movement Competence: plan a variety of offensive and defensive tactics that could be used in different situations in striking/fielding games; Healthy Living: describe what can be done to challenge stereotypes and assumptions, and to encourage respect for and acceptance of differences and inclusion of all people in social activities)

A. ACTIVE LIVING

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities, and demonstrate an understanding of factors that encourage lifelong participation in physical activity;
A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active, and apply physical fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living;
A3. demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in physical activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

A1. Active Participation

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

A1.1 actively participate in a wide variety of program activities (e.g., lead-up games, recreational activities, fitness activities, dance), according to their capabilities, while applying behaviours that enhance their readiness and ability to take part (e.g., being engaged and moving throughout the activity, using time effectively, being open to new activities, displaying fair play by taking turns and sharing, listening to others, not blaming or taking advantage of others) [PS, IS]

A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being active (e.g., having the opportunity to participate in activities in various sizes of groups and using various types of equipment, having a choice of activities, being able to take part in activities that are modified to suit their individual needs, being able to participate actively in a game or activity rather than having to sit it out, having a chance to take part in both team games and individual activities, experiencing pleasure in both the physical experiences and the aesthetic aspects of movement), as they participate in a wide variety of individual and small-group activities and lead-up games [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Involving everyone in the activity makes the activity more enjoyable for all. How can you ensure everyone is involved?”

Student: “By playing in groups of four instead of groups of eight, everyone gets lots of turns. Our group adjusted the boundaries to make it easier for everyone to play.” 

Teacher prompt: “When your group creates its dance sequence, all of you have to agree about what you are going to do and participate fully. If someone doesn’t agree, you need to find ways to negotiate or compromise.”

A1.3 describe factors that motivate them to participate in physical activity every day, at school and during leisure time, and that influence their choice of activities (e.g., influence of friends, enthusiasm for the outdoors, a preference for either team or individual activities, encouragement from others, increased time with friends, availability of a program, enjoyment of healthy competition, influence of media role models) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How do the things that motivate you to be active affect what you choose to do?”

Students: “I really like being outdoors, so I will pick activities that give me a chance to be outside. There is a new hiking and outdoor activities club being started at lunch. None of my friends are joining, but I think it sounds interesting, and I might meet someone new.” “I am learning traditional dancing because I want to learn about something that has a connection to my culture.” “I love competing and I love team sports and activities. Lots of team sports, like soccer, are available in my community.” “I do not like team sports, but I do like being active with other people. I kayak with my aunt on the weekends and, whenever I can, I go to the skateboard park with my friends.”

A2. Physical Fitness

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., hiking, playing lead-up soccer, doing fitness circuits, doing aerobic routines, orienteering; walking to reduce heart rate after activity, holding stretches after running) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “After our vigorous activity during DPA, we will walk slowly as our heartbeats return to a resting rate. We will stretch when our muscles are warm. Why is it important to stretch when our muscles are warm, and what should we remember as we do our stretches?”

Student: “Stretching when our muscles are warm reduces the risk of injury. It is important to stretch after doing any physical activity. As we do our stretches, we need to hold each stretch at the point of tension or tightness, but not to the point of pain.”

A2.2 explain how participation in physical activities affects personal health-related fitness (e.g., muscular strength and endurance activities help tone and strengthen muscles, flexibility activities can help prevent injuries, cardiorespiratory activities can improve the immune system) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Canada’s Physical Activity Guide for Youth recommends doing a combination of flexibility, strength, and endurance activities – both cardiorespiratory and muscular. How does your participation in physical activity affect your physical and mental health?”

Student: “I go swimming once a week, I ride my bike or walk to school every day, and I play road hockey as often as I can after school. The walking, biking, swimming, and hockey all help my ‘cardio’, because they are activities that make my heart beat faster and make me breathe deeply. These activities also help to build my muscular endurance. They help with my flexibility too, but I probably need to do more work specifically on my flexibility and also on my muscular strength. As I develop my fitness I find I have more energy, I get sick less often, and I generally feel more positive and happier.”

A2.3 assess their level of health-related fitness (i.e., cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility) as they participate in various physical activities (e.g., comparing how they feel before, during, and after an activity or simple fitness tasks), and monitor changes in their physical fitness over time (e.g., comparing their personal results and physical activity participation over a period of time, such as the beginning, middle, and end of the school term) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Can you give me examples of things that would be signs of fitness development over time?”

Students: “Holding myself in a front support or plank position has gotten easier from the beginning of the school year. I used to have to put my knees down after about ten seconds. I have been practising a lot and now I can hold a solid plank position for more than twenty seconds. I can tell that my core muscles are getting stronger.” “I felt a burning sensation again in my legs after doing the wall-sit, but it is not as difficult to hold as it was last month. I think my legs are getting stronger.” “I am working on being able to hold myself up out of my wheelchair for longer periods of time. My arms used to get very shaky, and I would just drop into the seat. I am getting stronger. I can hold myself for longer before I begin to shake.”

A2.4 develop and implement plans of action based on both their assessments of their health-related components of fitness and their interests, in order to achieve personal fitness goals (e.g., improving cardiorespiratory fitness by doing activities that increase the heart rate in order to be able to walk or run faster or wheel a specified distance; enhancing flexibility by holding a stretch for a designated amount of time) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “You have identified which health-related component of fitness you are going to focus on for your fitness goal. What will you do to help achieve your goal?”

Students: “I want to work on my cardiorespiratory fitness so I can go around the school property five times without stopping. I know that I will have to build up to this goal gradually. I will start by running and taking walking breaks when I need to, but gradually I won’t need to take them as often.” “I want to be able to play in a wheelchair basketball league, but I know I need to develop my arm strength to be able to play for as long as I need to during a game. I plan to work on doing lifts from my chair to help develop my arm strength.” “Because of my muscular dystrophy, I have muscle weakness. I have an individualized fitness plan, which was developed by my health care team – my doctor, my occupational and physical therapists, and my teacher. My plan outlines the kinds of exercise and the movements I can do safely. I will work towards the goals in my plan at my own pace, and I’ll ask for support when I need it.”

A3. Safety

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others during physical activity (e.g., demonstrating personal responsibility; checking that equipment is in good working order; wearing an appropriate and properly fitting helmet when taking part in activities such as bike riding, downhill skiing, or skateboarding; helping someone adjust the straps on his/her wheelchair) [PS, IS] 


Teacher prompt: “What do you need to check to make sure your equipment is safe to use?”

Student: “I need to make sure the equipment fits and that it’s not broken. For example, if a bat is cracked, it shouldn’t be used.”

A3.2 describe appropriate methods for treating minor injuries that may occur while participating in physical activity (e.g., applying pressure and ice to reduce swelling, cleaning and bandaging minor cuts, applying pressure to reduce bleeding, treating injuries quickly so they do not become worse) [PS, CT]

B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating an understanding of the basic requirements of the skills and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities;
B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in those activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

B1.1 perform smooth transfers of weight in relation to others and equipment in a variety of situations involving static and dynamic balance (e.g., shift weight smoothly during hip hop dancing; perform twists and balances on a stability ball; with a partner, use resistance [pushing] and counter-tension [pulling] by shifting and adjusting their weight and position to create a stable partner balance; move smoothly from a downward dog pose in yoga to a standing pose) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “When creating a partner balance, how do you use your weight and your balance skills to create a stable balance?”

Student: “My partner and I experiment with leaning backwards and forward to find the spot where we feel most balanced and secure. We sometimes need to change where our feet are positioned or how close we are to the ground to find a position where we feel stable. Just like when we are balancing on our own, keeping low to the ground, using a wide base of support, and keeping our muscles tight are things that help to make the balance more stable.”

B1.2 perform a wide variety of locomotor movements, in combination, at different speeds, in different directions, and using different pathways, while moving around others and/or equipment (e.g., wheel their wheelchair around objects and at different speeds in a fitness circuit; create a developmental gymnastics sequence with a partner that uses a range of movements and shows changes in speed, level, and formation) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “When creating your sequence to the music using a hula hoop, consider how to use your hula hoop in different ways – spinning it, tossing it to a partner, rolling it in different directions. Consider also how you move your body through, around, over and under the hoop, changing your own speed in relation to the movement of the hoop.”

B1.3 send and receive a variety of objects (e.g., rubber chickens, rings, beanbags, soft foam balls, discs, tennis balls, utility balls), adjusting for speed and distance, while applying basic principles of movement* (e.g., use different amounts of force to send an object to a teammate, depending on relative positions and type of object being thrown, batted, or kicked; send an object through a hoop, into a bucket, to a target on a wall, to a specific spot on the other side of a net, to a partner; bend knees, keeping arms out and head up in a ready position to prepare to receive an object; use the body to absorb an object that is sent with greater force; follow through in the direction of the target to improve aim and accuracy) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Once you are comfortable throwing and catching an object with a partner when you are stationary, try sending the object so your partner needs to move to catch it. After that, try sending and receiving it when both people are moving.”

B1.4 retain objects in a variety of situations while travelling in different pathways and at different speeds in relation to others and equipment (e.g., run to catch a football, then carry it in a “down and out” pattern that first goes down the field, then turns abruptly right or left; stickhandle a felt disc slowly and then quickly while keeping their head up) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Experiment with how you need to cradle the ball with the lacrosse stick as you run quickly, slowly, forwards, backwards, change direction, and spin around.”

B2. Movement Strategies

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

B2.1 demonstrate an understanding of the basic components of physical activities (e.g., movement skills, game structures, basic rules and guidelines, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and apply this understanding as they participate in a variety of physical activities (e.g., lead-up games such as four-on-four rubber-chicken keep-away, basketball shooting games, and two-base softball; recreational activities such as mini-triathlons, hiking, skipping rope, and cooperative games; fitness activities such as t’ai chi, activities with exercise bands and exercise balls, and personal fitness challenges; dance activities such as cultural dance, jazz, and creative movement) [IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How can you apply basic dance steps like a grapevine or a step touch in different dances and other activities?”

Student: “The grapevine step – step-behind-step-touch – or a simple step-touch is used in many folk dances, but you can use those same movements in a jazz, hip hop, or creative dance and make the steps look totally different by changing the way you move or adding arm movements. The same kind of footwork as a grapevine step, without stepping behind, is used when playing basketball or badminton as you shuffle or slide sideways.” 

Teacher prompt: “What movement skills and concepts do you use when you are playing a game like beach ball volleyball?”

Student: “You use skills like sending and receiving in control, getting under the ball to send it upwards, and using different amounts of force. You have to be able to move quickly to different positions on the court to hit the beach ball into an open space.”

* See page 26 for background information and a description of movement principles.

B2.2 describe common features of specific categories of physical activities* (e.g., individual, target, net/wall, striking/fielding, territory), and describe strategies that they found effective while participating in a variety of physical activities in different categories [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Striking/fielding games such as cricket, softball, lob ball, three-pitch, stickball, kickball, soccer baseball, and beep baseball all involve striking, running, retrieving an object, and returning it. Runners hit, kick, or throw an object, then score runs by running around a designated area or areas, usually called bases. Fielders work to retrieve the object quickly and return it to stop the runner. What strategies might be common to all of these activities?”

Student: “In all of these games, sending the object away from the fielders can help you score more runs. You need to watch the position of the ball, think about how far you have to run, and think about how fast you can run in order to plan when it is safe to run from base to base. Fielders need to be ready to retrieve the object quickly and work together to try to stop the runner.” 

Teacher prompt: “Consider what is similar about activities like fencing, t’ai chi, yoga, karate, kendo, qigong, and Pilates. What strategies might you use to improve your performance in all of these activities?”

Student: “Some of these activities are martial arts and were originally about defending yourself. With most of these activities, body form, control, breathing, flexibility, and alignment are important. There is a mind-body connection in these activities, and they require focus and concentration. To improve in these activities, I would need to work on overall fitness, core strength, and flexibility. Developing better control of my breathing would be an important strategy for improving my concentration and control of my movements.”

B2.3 apply a variety of tactical solutions to increase their chances of success as they participate in physical activities (e.g., individual activities: find a comfortable pace when running, wheeling a wheelchair, or speed-walking; work with a partner to develop different ways of using an exercise ball to improve core strength; target activities: in a game like bocce, hit opponents’ balls out of the way in order to make space for their own ball closer to the target; net/wall activities: assume a position of readiness to move to receive an object; practise sending the ball to specific parts of the opposite court; striking/fielding activities: throw the ball promptly to teammates after retrieving it to stop opponents from scoring; territory activities: defend territory by anticipating an opponent’s actions; bounce a utility ball at different heights to keep it from an opponent in a keep-away game; throw a disc to a stationary partner, then move down the field to receive a return pass) [IS, CT]** 

Teacher prompt: “When you are running, how do you find and maintain a steady, comfortable pace?”

Student: “Finding a comfortable pace takes practice. I try different paces and pay attention to how I feel. Running with a partner who likes to run at the same speed is sometimes a good way to maintain a steady pace.” 

* See pages 27–29 for background information and a description of various categories of physical activities. ** The types of living skills associated with students’ application of tactical solutions differ with the students’ developmental stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater or lesser degree. In Grades 1–3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills; in Grades 4–6, most students are ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions (e.g., giving encouraging feedback to others, asking clarifying questions when planning the next move with teammates); and in Grades 7 and 8, most are more prepared to focus their energy on the thinking skills involved.

Teacher prompt: “How do you, as a team, stop an opponent from scoring in a striking/ fielding game?”

Student: “In striking/fielding games, we can stop opponents from scoring by spreading out in the field to cover the space effectively and working together to field the ball quickly, using a relay person to throw the ball in from the outfield so our team can quickly tag the base.” 

Teacher prompt: “Why is it important to create space by spreading out around the playing area for your team in territory games?” Student: “In territory games, creating space gives your team clearer paths to pass the object and move it up the field or the gym towards the goal.”

C. HEALTHY LIVING

Chart from page 159 is omitted, text only
Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 6: Key Topics*

Topic
Healthy Eating
C2. Making Healthy Choices: 
C2.1 Influences on healthy eating [CT]
C2.2 Eating cues and guidelines [PS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Benefits of healthy eating/active living [CT]

Topic
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Safe and positive social interaction, conflict management [PS, IS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Responsibilities, risks – care for self and others, safety practices [PS, IS]

Topic
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: 
C1.1 Effects of cannabis, illicit drugs
C1.2 Supports – substance use, addictive behaviours

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.4 Strategies, safe choices, influences, tobacco, alcohol, cannabis [CT]

Topic
Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 163) - GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)

End of Chart
* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1–8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 206–207. The topics are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

C1. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development;
C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being;
C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being – how their choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around them affect their own and others’ health and well-being.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C1.1 describe the range of effects associated with using cannabis and other illicit drugs (e.g., crack, cocaine, Ecstasy, crystal methamphetamine) and intoxicating substances (e.g., gas, glue, prescription medications) 

Teacher prompt: “Different types of drugs can have very different effects on your body, depending on whether they are stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, or psychiatric drugs. Cannabis is a commonly used illicit drug. The effect of cannabis on your body depends on a number of things: how much you use, how often and how long you use it, whether you smoke it or swallow it, your mood, your environment, your age, whether you’ve taken other drugs, and your medical condition. What are some possible effects of using cannabis?”

Student: “Cannabis can change the way you see and feel things – distances can seem shorter or longer than they really are, and things that are serious can seem funny. Larger amounts can lead to feelings of losing control, panic, or confusion. Physical effects include red eyes, dry mouth, a higher heart rate, and a feeling of hunger. Using cannabis often and for a longer time can lead to being physically dependent on it. Then, when people stop using cannabis, they can have withdrawal symptoms, which can include feeling irritable, anxious, or nauseated, not having an appetite, or not being able to sleep well.”

Teacher: “How can these effects of cannabis affect a person’s life?”

Student: “Cannabis can affect your performance at school because it makes it harder to concentrate. It can be dangerous if it’s used with alcohol because it makes the effect of the alcohol stronger and makes you more intoxicated. It can affect your ability to drive safely. It can get you into trouble with the law because it is illegal to grow, possess, or sell cannabis. If you are pregnant, it can affect your baby. But cannabis is also used for some medical purposes, such as relieving nausea and stimulating appetite in patients who have cancer or AIDS.”

C1.2 identify people and community resources (e.g., elders, family members, community agencies, churches, mosques, synagogues, public health units, telephone help lines, recreation facilities) that can provide support when dealing with choices or situations involving substance use and addictive behaviours 

Teacher prompt: “How can calling a telephone help line provide support?” Student: “Talking with someone about problems can help you look at things from different perspectives. Sometimes you need to get help to deal with stress and to cope.”

C2. Making Healthy Choices

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

Healthy Eating

C2.1 apply their knowledge of medical, emotional, practical, and societal factors that influence eating habits and food choices (e.g., allergies and sensitivities, likes and dislikes, dental health, food availability, media influences, cultural influences, influence of family and friends, school food and beverage policies, environmental impact, cost) to develop personal guidelines for healthier eating [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How can a busy lifestyle lead to poor eating habits and food choices, and what can you do to eat better when you are busy?” Student: “When you’re busy, it is easy to eat whatever is quick and convenient, which is not always healthy. To eat better, you have to fit your healthy eating goals into your lifestyle. If I bring a snack with me, I usually eat healthier food than if I grab something on my way. If I have to pick something up on the way, I try to make the healthiest choice from what is available. In our family, we eat meals together whenever we can. When our family eats together, we eat healthier food and have time to enjoy the food and the company.” 

Teacher prompt: “How do you handle emotional and social factors that could lead to poor eating habits or choices?”

Student: “I try to be aware of why I am eating. Sometimes I eat because I’m bored or lonely and have a treat to make me feel better or because the people I am with are eating. Sometimes I eat without thinking because I’m distracted. I make healthier choices when I’m feeling better. If I think about why I want to eat and whether I’m really hungry, I might decide to do something different instead of eating. I make better food choices when I’m with people who are also making healthy choices. Thinking about the situations where it’s easier to make healthy choices is useful for me. I also try to be aware of media messages about eating and know that what I am seeing and hearing may not always match up with healthy eating practices.”

C2.2 apply their recognition of internal hunger and thirst cues and their knowledge of physical factors that influence the desire to eat and drink (e.g., stage of development, growth spurts, level of physical activity, eating larger portions) to develop personal guidelines for healthier eating [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “How do you feel if you wait until you are very hungry to eat? How does your body feel when you have eaten too much?” Student: “When I’m very hungry, I eat quickly and I don’t really taste my food. Sometimes I keep eating before I realize that I’m full. I end up feeling uncomfortable. I need to be aware of those things and try to eat when I’m hungry and stop when I’m full.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C2.3 apply personal skills and interpersonal skills (e.g., self-awareness and self-management skills, including anger management; communication skills, including listening skills and assertiveness skills) to promote positive interaction and avoid or manage conflict in social situations (e.g., classroom groups, groups of friends, sports teams, school clubs) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “If someone does something that makes you feel very angry, what can you do to manage your anger?”

Student: “I can take some deep breaths, walk away, and give myself some time and space to cool down. Doing something outdoors and physical, like running, swimming, playing basketball, or biking, helps me. When I am calmer, I can think about what made me angry and about whether there is anything I can do to prevent the situation from happening again.” 

Teacher prompt: “When working in groups, what have you found helpful in making your group function well?”

Student: “Our group works best when we make sure everyone gets a turn to speak, when we are clear about what everyone is supposed to do, and when we listen to each other and treat each other with respect.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C2.4 use decision-making strategies and skills and an understanding of factors influencing drug use (e.g., personal values, peer pressure, media influences, curiosity, legal restrictions, cultural teachings) to make safe personal choices about the use of drugs such as alcohol, tobacco, and cannabis [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How can peers influence your decisions about using drugs? How might you respond to those influences?”

Student: “Some peers may try to influence you to do drugs by saying it’s cool to do them, or sometimes you may just want to be part of a crowd that’s doing drugs. To avoid this kind of influence, you have to be strong as an individual, think about what you really want and what you value, and make up your own mind about things. Even if someone tells you ‘everyone is doing it’, your decisions are your own, and so are the consequences. But peers can be a positive influence too. Hanging out with friends who don’t use drugs can keep you from using drugs. It also helps to have good role models in your family or community.”

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

Healthy Eating

C3.1 explain how healthy eating and active living work together to improve a person’s general health and well-being (e.g., both provide more energy and contribute to improved self-concept, greater resistance to disease, and better overall health; both help a person to maintain a weight that is healthy for them) and how the benefits of both can be promoted to others [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Why is healthy eating important for active living? How does active living affect the way we eat and the way our bodies use the food we eat?” Student: “Eating healthy foods gives me the nutrients I need to be energetic and active. Healthy food and physical activity are both necessary to build stronger bones and muscles. Being active also gives me more of an appetite. When I am more active, I need to eat more because I am using more energy and burning more calories.” 

Teacher prompt: “How can you promote the benefits of healthy eating and active living at school?” Student: “I can lead by example. I can be a role model for younger students at recess by having a healthy snack, like a piece of fruit, and playing an active game, like tag, instead of standing around.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C3.2 recognize the responsibilities and risks associated with caring for themselves and others (e.g., while babysitting, staying home alone, caring for pets, volunteering in the community, assisting someone with a disability, preparing meals, travelling to and from school and other locations), and demonstrate an understanding of related safety practices and appropriate procedures for responding to dangerous situations (e.g., safe practices for preparing food; responses to allergic reactions, fire, sports injuries, dental emergencies, hypothermia, bullying) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What should you do to protect yourself before volunteering in the community?”

Student: “Have a parent or caregiver check to make sure the situation is safe.”

Teacher: “What are some ways in which you could help someone who has a physical disability?”

Student: “I could ask the person if they would like help and, if so, what kind of help. I could help someone who is blind or partially sighted by walking with them as a guide. I might be able to help a person in a wheelchair transfer to a chair, if I were given instructions about how to help.”

Teacher: “If you are preparing a meal for yourself or others, what are some things to be aware of to stay safe?”

Student: “Be cautious and handle all equipment carefully when preparing food and using appliances, sharp knives, or utensils. Keep young children away from sharp knives, hot things, and other objects that could cause injury.”

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998) (Table content for page 163)

OVERALL EXPECTATION

By the end of Grade 6, students will:

• identify the major parts of the reproductive system and their functions and relate them to puberty.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 6, students will: 
• relate the changes at puberty to the reproductive organs and their functions;
• apply a problem-solving/decision-making process to address issues related to friends, peers, and family relationships.

OVERVIEW OF GRADES 7 AND 8

No longer children but not yet adults, adolescents are beginning to face life decisions that may have major consequences for them as well as others. Their lives are changing rapidly, and they need more advanced knowledge and skills to understand and cope with the changes they are experiencing and to make responsible decisions about their health. As they grow into their adult bodies, they have the opportunity to establish patterns of healthy, active living that will benefit them throughout their lives.

Student Development and Program Implications

Program design and delivery must take into account the physical, cognitive, and emotional development of students. The following descriptions of the developmental characteristics of students in the intermediate grades are general in nature, and individual student characteristics will vary depending on the child’s age, sex, body size, experience, and background. Because the developmental characteristics and needs of students in these grades cover such a wide range, awareness of individual needs is critically important at this level.

Physical Domain

Students in the intermediate grades may still be going through a growth spurt. For females, the growth spurt tends to occur between the ages of 9 and 13 years, and for males, between 11 and 15 years. Thus, students may vary considerably in their physical development, and growth differences may still account for differences in physical abilities and skills. At this age, most gross and fine motor skills are developed. Students tend to be able to combine motor skills and have the ability to participate in modified or full versions of sports, activities, and dance. Students may also develop specialized skills related to specific activities that they have become interested in and may be ready to learn and practise performance-related components of fitness – agility, coordination, balance, speed, and power – that will help them in these activities.

It is important at this level not only to recognize the developing abilities and skills of the students but to continue to differentiate instruction and assessment to address students’ individual needs. In particular, it is important to provide: 
• opportunities for students to make their own choices of activities and equipment and ways of modifying these; 
• opportunities for students to choose a level of participation that suits their stage of development and abilities; 
• constructive feedback to guide students as they develop and refine their physical skills.

Health and Physical Education

Cognitive Domain

Students in the intermediate grades are becoming capable of handling more complex thought processes. They are generally able to process and understand more complex instructions and strategies, although cognitive abilities will vary, and they generally have well-developed attention spans. Accompanying these expanding intellectual capacities is a greater understanding of their individual learning preferences. Some students may know that they learn best when given the opportunity to explore and discover on their own. Others may know that they learn best by collaborating with others or that they benefit from more direct guidance and supervision. Programs for students in these grades should offer instructional activities that are personally relevant and meaningful. Students need to see themselves reflected in the curriculum. This underlies the importance of recognizing and including all students of all backgrounds.

Programs should also offer students opportunities to make their own creative adaptations to activities in order to stimulate their thinking and create an optimal level of challenge, one that is neither too hard nor too easy and that is interesting for all participants. Affective Domain

Students in the intermediate grades are in the process of forming their adult identities and consolidating their moral beliefs and values. They are very much influenced by the world around them, and especially by their peers, who are a major source of motivation. They are continuing to develop their interpersonal skills and generally enjoy participating in activities with their peers. Their responses to winning and losing vary individually but can be very emotional.

Programs for these students should provide opportunities for students to interact positively with their peers, to continue developing and improving their interpersonal skills, and to learn and apply concepts of equity, fair play, and social justice. Larger group activities should be introduced gradually. However, students should still have the opportunity to participate in individual activities and play in small groups in order to facilitate maximum participation and accommodate individual preferences and learning styles. Sport and physical activity can be powerful socializing agents for adolescents. In some cases, they can also create environments of exclusion. Some adolescents move away from physical activity because of physical, social, and emotional changes or stresses at puberty. Adolescence is a key time for using the opportunities provided within health and physical education to reach and connect with youth and provide them with positive social, emotional, and physical experiences.

Focus of Learning in Health and Physical Education for the Intermediate Division

Living Skills

The emphasis in the intermediate grades shifts to critical and creative thinking skills. Students will have opportunities to practise using processes for solving problems, setting goals, resolving conflicts, and making decisions. Students will continue to develop their personal and interpersonal skills, increasing their awareness of self and continuing to improve their awareness when communicating and interacting with others.

Active Living Strand

Expectations in the intermediate grades consolidate and build on much of the work done in previous grades, adding new knowledge and extending the range of application to new situations. Students become acquainted with a greater range of opportunities and environments for physical activity and expand their knowledge of motivating factors to include ways of motivating others to be physically active. The physical fitness activities continue to emphasize self-assessment, self-monitoring, and goal setting, but within the context of a more detailed understanding of fitness that includes factors affecting fitness and the application of training principles to the enhancement of both health-related and skill-related fitness. The safety expectations are expanded to take in the broader range of venues that older students are active in and the greater level of responsibility that they are capable of handling. In particular, students learn how to anticipate and protect themselves from outdoor hazards and how to respond to emergency situations.

Movement Competence Strand

As they continue their development of movement skills, students in the intermediate grades work on more complex combinations of stability and locomotor skills and their application in relation to stimuli (e.g., other students, equipment, music) in their immediate environment. The work on manipulation skills (throwing, catching, and retaining) emphasizes the use of these skills in combination and in relation to external stimuli in the playing area (e.g., other students, equipment, boundaries). They learn to apply their understanding of movement principles and the phases of movement to refining these skills and have multiple opportunities to explore previously learned movement concepts, with a particular emphasis on the concepts of effort and relationship. Their study of activity components, categories, and strategies expands to include a wider range of activities and activity environments, deeper reflection about how the use of different tactics affects their participation in an activity, and an examination of similarities and differences between various activities with respect to their skills, tactics, and rules.

Healthy Living Strand

Students will continue to learn about the factors that contribute to healthy development and consider how that information connects to their personal health choices and to the health of others in the world around them. In the intermediate grades, they will focus on making connections between their own health and the health and well-being of those around them.

Grade 7 and 8 students add to their knowledge of healthy eating practices by acquiring a deeper understanding of nutritional concepts and the relationship between nutrition and disease, as well as learning more advanced approaches to managing their own food intake, making healthy food choices, and promoting healthy eating to others. The study of personal safety and injury prevention expands to include situations that students in these grades may encounter as they become more independent and active in a wider variety of situations and environments, including online and virtual environments. Students also consider the consequences of bullying, harassment, and violent behaviour and examine ways of preventing or responding to it. Expectations relating to substance use, addictions, and related behaviour introduce them to linkages with mental health and stress, expand their understanding of the personal and social consequences of addictions, and examine how concerns with body image, which are very prevalent at this age, can lead to problematic substance use.

The Growth and Development expectations from the 1998 curriculum document focus on age-appropriate questions related to human sexuality. Students have opportunities to explore the physical, emotional, interpersonal, and spiritual aspects of healthy sexuality, and to develop the communication skills they need to express their concerns and feelings in these areas. They also learn to identify local sources of support related to sexuality and sexual health. Students are expected to develop an understanding of reproductive systems, the possible consequences of risky behaviours, pregnancy and disease prevention, and abstinence as a positive choice for adolescents.

GRADE 7

Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided to illustrate the intended learning – the concepts that students should understand and the skills they are to acquire – in connection with the particular expectation. The student responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, or word choice typical of students in the different grades.

LIVING SKILLS 

Student learning related to the Living Skills expectations takes place in the context of learning related to the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands, and should be assessed and evaluated within these contexts.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

1. Living Skills

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

Personal Skills (PS)*

1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own progress, as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: describe the role models that may have influenced some of their choices with respect to physical activity; consider what effect their family and their cultural background have had on the way they think about participation in physical activity or on the activities they choose; Movement Competence: take responsibility for improving a skill by breaking it down, getting feedback on the way they perform each part, and working on parts that need improvement; Healthy Living: describe ways in which they can monitor and stay aware of their own physical, emotional, and psychological health) 

Student: “I am working on improving my front crawl. I need to think about a number of things connected to my arm movement, including where my hand enters the water, the angle of my hand as I pull, the amount of effort I am using, and how my arm moves as I pull it around to begin the stroke again.”

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: use organizational and time-management skills to find a balance when planning time to be active every day, to complete homework, and to spend time with family and friends; Movement Competence: demonstrate how to refine movements by adjusting body position during the preparation, execution, and follow-through stages of an action; Healthy Living: describe how to access different sources of support when dealing with issues connected to substance use or mental health)

* The abbreviation(s) for the three categories of living skills – PS, IS, and CT – appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, in strands A–C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 18–21 for a discussion of living skills.)

Interpersonal Skills (IS)*

1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: clearly communicate refusal to participate in activities that are unsafe, particularly when peer pressure is involved; Movement Competence: show readiness to receive a pass in a game by moving into position, making eye contact, and holding a hand out to act as a target; when the other team scores in a game of handball, say something supportive, such as “Good try”, to the goalie; Healthy Living: practise effective responses to someone who directs a homophobic or racial slur to them or to another student)

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective team members (e.g., Active Living: make adjustments to activities that will allow all group members to be included and to enjoy participating; Movement Competence: work cooperatively with a partner when hitting a badminton shuttle back and forth; Healthy Living: explain how appreciating differences can contribute to positive relationship building)

Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)*

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking skills and processes to assist them in making connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education (e.g., Active Living: describe how they can use health-related fitness-assessment information when making action plans for personal fitness; Movement Competence: devise and experiment with different tactical solutions for better results in particular sports and other physical activities; Healthy Living: explain the connections between body image, mental health, and the risk of substance abuse; explain the importance of understanding connections between food choices and chronic diseases)

A. ACTIVE LIVING

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities, and demonstrate an understanding of factors that encourage lifelong participation in physical activity;

A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active, and apply physical fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living;

A3. demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in physical activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS 

A1. Active Participation

By the end of Grade 7, students will: 

A1.1 actively participate in a wide variety of program activities, according to their capabilities (e.g., individual activities, small- and large-group activities, movement and rhythmic activities, dance, outdoor pursuits), while applying behaviours that enhance their readiness and ability to take part (e.g., striving to do their best, displaying good sports etiquette along with healthy competition) in all aspects of the program [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What does healthy competition look like? How does it contribute to active participation?”

Student: “Healthy competition includes doing your best and pushing yourself to play as hard as you can, whether you are competing with yourself or as a member of a team. It contributes to active participation by giving you a goal that makes you want to be completely involved. Competition isn’t healthy if you are just playing to win without following rules of etiquette and fair play.”

A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being active (e.g., being able to modify games for different purposes; being able to take part in activities that suit their individual abilities and interests; being exposed to a variety of activities, including recreational, team, individual, body management, and dance and fitness activities; feeling comfortable about the activities; being able to take part in activities that are culturally relevant), as they participate in a diverse range of physical activities in a variety of indoor and outdoor environments [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “What is a physical activity that you like to do or a skill that you like to practise? What is it in these games or skills that you particularly like?”

Students: “I love to run fast. I can do that in cross-country running, soccer, and tag.” “I love activities that provide a mental challenge as well as a physical challenge. For example, in my karate class after school, I have to think about how I’m going to execute every move that I perform. I also like team games because they involve strategy.”

A1.3 demonstrate an understanding of the factors that motivate or impede participation in physical activity every day (e.g., peer influence, sense of belonging, self-confidence, availability of resources and opportunities, influence of role models, compatibility or conflict with family responsibilities) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What motivates you to be active, and what stops you from being more active?”

Student: “I love to dance. I would like to be able to take a dance class every day, but it is too expensive and I can’t afford the time, so I take a class twice a week and dance on my own or with my friends whenever I can.”

A2. Physical Fitness

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., aerobic fitness circuits, floorball, capture the flag, wheelchair soccer) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “How do you know that you are being active to the best of your ability when participating in physical activities?”

Student: “It is a personal measure. I know what it feels like to push myself hard. My heart rate goes up, I breathe faster, I get hot, and my muscles get tired. I know that if I am taking frequent breaks, not breathing very hard, or not feeling my muscles work, I am not working my hardest for that activity.”

A2.2 identify factors that can affect health-related fitness (e.g., heredity, nutrition, developmental stage, environmental factors, social and emotional factors, mental health, cultural teachings), and describe how training principles (e.g., frequency, intensity, duration, type of activity) can be applied to develop fitness [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “During puberty, bodies change in size and shape. This can have an effect on your energy levels and on your level of participation in fitness activities. What other factors can affect your fitness development?”

Student: “How I am feeling about my body can affect the kind of activities I choose to do. Having access to safe places to be active outdoors would help me be more active. Good nutrition is important for fitness, so I can help to develop my fitness by eating healthy foods that provide energy for being active.” 

Teacher prompt: “What are some things you can do to develop your fitness?”

Student: “I need to do different kinds of activities, such as aerobic, stretching, and strengthening activities, to develop different aspects of fitness. If I am working on my cardiorespiratory endurance, I need to gradually increase the length and frequency of my workouts and also the intensity of my training. I can gradually increase the number of laps I do, or the length of time I am active, to build up my endurance. If I am working on improving my flexibility, I need to do specific stretches for the parts of my body that I’m working on.”

A2.3 assess their level of health-related fitness (i.e., cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility) during various physical activities and monitor changes in fitness levels over time (e.g., by tracking heart rates, recovery time, changes in how one feels during and after activity; by comparing activity participation and changes in fitness levels) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What is a good indication that your fitness is getting better?”

Student: “Tracking my heart rate recovery time and how I feel during activities is an indication of my fitness level. If my heartbeat is returning to its resting rate fairly quickly after I work out, then I know that my cardiorespiratory fitness is improving. Checking how I feel after skipping or playing soccer at recess also gives me information about my fitness level.”

A2.4 develop, implement, and revise a personal plan to meet short-term, health-related fitness goals (e.g., by using personal assessment information to set realistic short-term goals, using appropriate training principles, identifying possible challenges, identifying sources of support, determining what will indicate when goals have been reached, monitoring progress and comparing achievements to planned goals, acknowledging successes, changing goals or approaches as needed) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What things do you need to consider when you set a short-term fitness goal? How do you know if you have accomplished your goal?”

Student: “I need to consider what aspects of health-related fitness I want to focus on, then I need to identify what I can do to improve or maintain those aspects of my fitness. I need to think about what will help me accomplish my plan. If I set a goal to improve my core strength, I would need to think about what activities would be most helpful, and then about what activities I like to do that are both available and affordable for me. I might join a yoga or Pilates class, but if one were not available in my community, I would need to think about alternatives. I could do activities on my own at home, or I might be able to use a video that would help me, or work out with a friend. To know if I had accomplished my goal, I would need to track how I am feeling and compare what I was able to do before I started with what I could do after I had worked on my fitness for a while. Depending on the results, I might need to consider doing some things differently.”

A3. Safety

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others (e.g., following appropriate procedures and guidelines, demonstrating social responsibility, checking that they have their puffers and/or epinephrine autoinjectors, checking for hazards such as pencils or other objects on the floor or potholes on the field before beginning activities, using mouth guards when necessary during recreational activities in the community, avoiding pressuring a peer to participate in unsafe activities, being respectful of others who may be hesitant to try new skills) in a variety of physical activity settings (e.g., school, community recreational facilities, outdoor recreational venues) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “What does all safe behaviour in physical activity have in common, whether you are participating in activities at school or in the community?”

Student: “Wherever you are participating, you need to be aware of yourself and others in your surroundings. Also, depending on the activity, you need to apply appropriate safety procedures. Using good judgement, thinking for yourself, and thinking before you act are good general guidelines.”

A3.2 demonstrate an understanding of procedures for anticipating and responding to hazards that may lead to injury or ailments while participating in physical activity outdoors (e.g., be aware of common hazards that could be encountered and take appropriate precautions; apply systems thinking to risk assessment by making connections between possible hazards and their outcomes; recognize unexpected hazards, assess the risk, and control the hazard by telling someone about it, removing it, or removing themselves from the danger) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Being safe helps you enjoy your time outdoors. When cycling on a forest trail, what do you need to be mindful of?”

Student: “I need to make sure to wear a helmet, follow trail etiquette, and stay in control, so that if there is a fallen tree or another unexpected object on the trail I can avoid it and not be hurt. By following trail etiquette, I am less likely to get into situations where I can hurt myself or somebody else, or damage the environment.” 

Teacher prompt: “What can you do to protect yourself from the sun’s UV radiation outdoors?”

Student: “I need to be aware of the UV index for the day and limit my time in the sun during peak periods. I can protect myself by wearing sunglasses and a hat and applying sunscreen.” 

Teacher prompt: “What should you do if you find a pothole on the playing field?”

Student: “I should do something to warn everyone of the danger – for example, I could put a pylon on the pothole.”

B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating an understanding of the basic requirements of the skills and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities;
B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in those activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

B1.1 perform smooth transfers of weight and rotations, in relation to others and equipment, in a variety of situations involving static and dynamic balance (e.g., perform a rhythmic gymnastic sequence such as throwing a ball, performing a shoulder roll, and catching the ball; demonstrate a dance sequence with a partner, including a series of steps, jumps, turns, and balances; perform a smooth high jump approach, take-off, and landing; use a low stance for balance during a pivot turn; move smoothly between positions in a yoga sequence) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “When doing a series of steps, jumps, and balances in a dance routine, what helps you to maintain control and make the movement transitions smooth?”

Student: “Holding my muscles tight, practising transitions between movements, counting the steps in my head, matching my steps to the rhythm of the movement, and asking for feedback from a partner.”

B1.2 perform a wide variety of locomotor movements, with and without equipment, while responding to a variety of external stimuli (e.g., dodge and fake in response to others, accelerate before taking off for a high jump or a running long jump, respond to changes in music during creative dance by changing arm movements, lift feet and show awareness of trail conditions and obstacles when running cross-country on trails) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Describe how your running changes as you approach a long jump. How is it different with a high jump?”

Student: “With a long jump, I should be running my fastest just before I take off, so that I have the maximum forward momentum. With a high jump, I need to change my forward momentum to upward momentum, so I should run in a C or a J pattern, starting out fast, then slowing down a little just before I take off to go over the bar.” 

Teacher prompt: “How can you move your body to show a response to different types of music in a dance sequence that you are putting together?”

Student: “For loud and dramatic music, we could use large movements with lots of arm action. Our movements might be smooth or sharp, depending on the rhythm of the music.”

B1.3 send, receive, and retain a variety of objects, while taking into account their position and motion in relation to others, equipment, and boundaries, while applying basic principles of movement* (e.g., use different strokes and varying degrees of force, depending on their opponent’s position on the court, to return the shuttle in badminton; assume a ready position to prepare to receive a short pass; strike a ball by shifting their weight as they contact the ball and following through in the intended direction to send it between or over opposing players; cradle or control the ball on the side of the body that is away from opponents when moving up the field) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “How do you need to adjust your position when receiving a pass on the move?”

Student: “When receiving a pass, I need to have my weight forward and on my toes so that I’ll be ready to move in different ways, depending on how fast the object is coming. When receiving an object when I am on the move, I may need to back up and be prepared to absorb the force if it is coming quickly. If it is coming slowly, I may need to move forward quickly in time to meet the object.”

B1.4 demonstrate an understanding of the phases of movement (i.e., preparation, execution, followthrough), and apply this understanding to the refinement of movement skills as they participate in a variety of physical activities (e.g., jumping during a dance routine: bend knees to get ready to jump, thrust arms up for extra force while jumping, hold a controlled body position in flight, bend knees and put arms out for a stable landing) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Watch a partner serve a volleyball underhand against a wall. What are some tips you can share with your partner to help him/her send the volleyball successfully?”

Student: “Start in a ready position and prepare by holding the ball in your opposite hand. To serve underhand, bend your knees and step with the opposite foot, swing your striking arm back, then swing it straight forward, with force, in the direction you want the ball to go. Shift your weight forward as your hand contacts the ball. Follow through in the direction of the target.”

B2. Movement Strategies

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

B2.1 demonstrate an understanding of the components of a range of physical activities (e.g., movement skills, game structures, basic rules and guidelines, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and apply this understanding as they participate in a variety of physical activities in indoor and outdoor environments [IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “We’ve been trying out some traditional Inuit physical activities, like leg wrestling, push-up hop, and jump kick. What movement skills and components of fitness do you need for these activities?”

* See page 26 for background information and a description of movement principles.

Student: “All of these activities require stability skills and some locomotor skills. They also require physical strength, endurance, and agility. With leg wrestling, you need core strength and also balance. With the push-up hop, you need strength to be able to move forward while hopping in a push-up position. For the jump kick, you need flexibility as well as strength and balance to be able to kick an object that is held over your head.” 

Teacher prompt: “Why do you need to consider etiquette and how to work well with others when engaging in various kinds of activities?”

Student: “When doing an activity with others, you need to be able to work together to agree on things like team selection, rules, equipment, and boundaries. If teams are uneven or rules make the activity too challenging, the game isn’t fun. Rules of etiquette are needed to ensure that people show respect for each other. Even with individual activities, you need to be aware of proper etiquette in relation to others. For example, when jogging, you show respect for others when passing on sidewalks. Another part of etiquette is showing that you respect the environment as well as other people. For example, you could show that you respect the environment when running by staying on trails or pathways rather than running off the path.”

B2.2 describe and compare different categories of physical activities* (e.g., individual, target, net/wall, striking/fielding, territory), and describe strategies that they found effective while participating in a variety of physical activities in different categories [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Territory games such as lacrosse, basketball, ultimate disc, rugby, soccer, broomball, speedball, ringette, wheelchair basketball, goal ball, and sledge hockey all involve controlling an object, keeping it away from opponents, and working together as a team to move it across the playing area until someone on the team can score. These games commonly involve the use of kicking, carrying, running, and/or throwing skills. Territory games have the most complex structures of all of the game categories because of the number of variables and the number of people involved. What strategies might you apply in any territory game?”

Student: “Teamwork is very important in all of these games. When you or your team has the object, important strategies involve focusing on ways of working together as a team to keep possession of the object, moving it down the playing area, and getting into an open space so you can either receive a pass or get a clear shot at the goal. When you do not have the object, important strategies include working together as a team to try to regain possession of the object by staying between the offensive player and the goal, and using your hands, feet, or stick (depending on the game) to keep your opponent from scoring.” 

Teacher prompt: “Territory games often involve fast transitions from offence to defence. How is this different from net/wall activities, striking/fielding activities, or target activities?”

Student: “Because the transition from offence to defence is often very quick in territory activities, players need to be ready to switch directions and strategies as the play changes. That also happens in net/wall activities, but in those games, each team stays on its own court while changing from offence to defence. In striking/fielding and target activities, there is a stop in the game as teams switch from offence to defence, so the pace is slower and more controlled.” 

* See pages 27–29 for background information and a description of various categories of physical activities.

Teacher prompt: “Consider what is similar about activities like canoeing, triathlons, and track and field. What do these activities have in common, and what strategies might you use in all of these activities?”

Student: “These activities all involve a combination of skills. With canoeing, you need to paddle, but often you also need to be able to carry the canoe. A triathlon involves swimming, biking, and running. There are a number of activities in track and field, including running races of different distances and different types of jumps and throws. In each of these activities, you need to practise and develop your fitness to improve. Strategies for all these activities focus on pacing and on planning transitions from one phase of the activity to another.”

B2.3 apply a variety of tactical solutions to increase chances of success as they participate in physical activities (e.g., individual activities: practise a dance or gymnastics sequence in parts to refine each move, then put it back together in a sequence; target activities: adjust force when sending the object so that it will stop or land in a position to block the opponent; net/wall activities: work with teammates to cover space effectively; striking/fielding activities: hit or kick in different ways, varying the distance the object is sent, so that it will be more difficult for opponents to field and return the object; territory activities: use a “give and go” by sending the object to a teammate (give) then running to an open space to receive the object back again from the teammate (go); kick a leading pass to a moving teammate to maintain possession) [IS, CT]* 

Teacher prompt: “How do you make it difficult for opponents to hit the ball in striking/ fielding activities?”

Student: “Change the speed and pathway of the ball. Change the level of the throw. Put a spin on the ball.”

* The types of living skills associated with students’ application of tactical solutions differ with the students’ developmental stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater or lesser degree. In Grades 1–3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills; in Grades 4–6, most students are ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions; and in Grades 7 and 8, most are prepared to focus their energy on the thinking skills involved (e.g., transferring understanding from one activity to another; applying systems thinking by transferring their learning from a specific context to a more global context, as in considering the environmental benefits as well as the fitness and recreational benefits of using active transportation; including a variety of different moves in a creative way in a dance or fitness routine).

C. HEALTHY LIVING

Chart from page 180 is omitted, text only
Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 7: Key Topics*

Topic
Healthy Eating
C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Food choices and health problems [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Healthy eating practices and routines

Topic
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Benefits and dangers – technology

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Impact – bullying/harassment [IS, CT]

Topic
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Mental health, substances, support [PS]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Body image, substance use [PS, CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Implications of substance use and addictions [CT]

Topic
Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 184) - GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)

* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1–8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 206–207. The topics are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

C1. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development;
C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being;
C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being – how their choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around them affect their own and others’ health and well-being.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C1.1 describe benefits and dangers, for themselves and others, that are associated with the use of computers and other technologies (e.g., benefits: saving time; increased access to information; improved communication, including global access; dangers: misuse of private information; identity theft; cyberstalking; hearing damage and/or traffic injuries from earphone use; financial losses from online gambling; potential for addiction), and identify protective responses 

Teacher prompt: “What are some ways of protecting your safety when using a computer at home or in a public place?”

Student: “Everyone should be aware that anything they write or post could become public information. If you do not want someone else to know about something, you should not write about it or post it. You should never share your password. If you are a target of online harassment, you should save and print the messages you received and get help from a parent, teacher, or other trusted adult.” 

Teacher prompt: “The practice of sending explicit sexual messages or photos electronically, predominantly by cell phone, is a practice that has significant risks. What are some of those risks?”

Student: “Photos and messages can become public. They can be manipulated or misinterpreted. If they become public, they can have an impact on future relationships and even jobs.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C1.2 demonstrate an understanding of linkages between mental illness and problematic substance use, and identify school and community resources (e.g., trusted adults at school, guidance counsellors, public health services, community elders, help lines) that can provide support for mental health concerns relating to substance use, addictions, and related behaviours [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Problematic substance use is a term that refers to the use of substances in ways that are potentially harmful. It includes both substance misuse, which is the use of substances in ways that are illegal or not recommended medically, and substance abuse, which involves excessive use of substances despite the physical, mental, emotional, social, legal, or economic harm that this may cause to oneself or others. Problematic substance use and mental illness are often closely connected. Many people suffer from both, although it is important to note that one doesn’t necessarily cause the other. In some cases, the causes may be quite different, or both may be caused by a common factor, which could be genetic, developmental, or environmental. For example, traumatic events (an environmental factor) can lead to both mental health and substance use problems. In other cases, mental illness may contribute to problematic substance use: alcohol and drugs may be used as a means to cope with a mental illness and may make the symptoms of the illness worse. Conversely, long-term drug use can lead to a loss of contact with reality and to the development of delusions and other psychotic symptoms similar to those seen in some mental illnesses. What are some mental illnesses that are sometimes connected with problematic substance use?”

Student: “Depression, eating disorders, anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia are sometimes associated with problematic substance use.”

C2. Making Healthy Choices

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

Healthy Eating 
C2.1 demonstrate the ability to make healthier food choices, using information about the role that different foods play as contributing or preventive factors in a variety of health disorders (e.g., cancer, Type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, obesity, food allergies and anaphylaxis, tooth decay, osteoporosis) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What you eat can contribute positively to your overall health, but it can also contribute to health problems. Eating healthy foods gives you the vitamins, minerals, and nutrients you need to be healthy. An unhealthy diet is one of many factors, including obesity, physical inactivity, smoking, and high blood pressure, that can increase the risk of illness and disease. Fruit and vegetable consumption helps protect against a variety of cancers, whereas a diet high in red meat and processed meat has been linked to an increased risk of cancer. Avoiding sticky foods and following good oral hygiene practices helps reduce the risk of tooth decay. Getting enough calcium from dairy products, calcium-fortified soy beverages, vegetables, and fish or meat alternatives when your bones are growing can help prevent the development of osteoporosis in later years. Avoiding high-fat foods can help reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and obesity. A healthy diet that follows the recommendations of Canada’s Food Guide, contains plenty of fruits and vegetables and high-fibre foods, and avoids unhealthy (saturated and trans) fats can help you maintain a healthy weight and prevent illness.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C2.2 assess the impact of different types of bullying or harassment (e.g., intimidation, ostracism, pressure to conform, gang activities) on themselves and others, and identify ways of preventing or resolving such incidents (e.g., communicating feelings; reporting incidents involving themselves or others; encouraging others to understand the social responsibility to report incidents and support others rather than maintaining a code of silence or viewing reporting as “ratting”; seeking help from support services; learning skills for emotional regulation; using strategies for defusing tense or potentially violent situations) [IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What kind of support will the person who was bullied and the bystander need?”

Student: “They need to be listened to and given a chance to express their feelings about the harm that has been done and to contribute their ideas about what needs to be done to put things right. They need to be given help to make sure the bullying stops. They might be afraid and may need counselling to recover emotionally from being bullied or witnessing bullying.”

Teacher: “Repair processes such as restorative justice might be put in place for the person who did the bullying in order to prevent the incident from happening again. Restorative justice puts the emphasis on the wrong done to the person as well as the wrong done to the community. It requires wrongdoers to recognize the harm they have caused, accept responsibility for their actions, and be actively involved in improving the situation. What has to occur before this can happen?”

Student: “The person who did the bullying has to admit guilt and accept responsibility for his or her actions. He or she needs to participate willingly in the process. The person who was targeted also needs to participate willingly, without feeling pressured. It is really important for their participation to be voluntary and for the process of restorative justice not to cause further harm. Trained facilitators can make sure that the restorative justice program is helpful to everyone.” 

Teacher prompt: “What are some of the consequences of using homophobic put-downs or racial slurs? How can this hurtful behaviour be prevented?”

Student: “Using homophobic or racist language is discriminatory. It hurts the people who are targeted and it can have harmful consequences for the whole atmosphere in the school. Sometimes, people speak without thinking about what they are actually saying and how they are hurting others. To change this behaviour, everyone needs to take responsibility for the words they use and also to challenge others who make discriminatory comments or put people down.” 

Teacher prompt: “Inappropriate sexual behaviour, including things like touching someone’s body as they walk by in the hall, making sexual comments, or pulling pieces of clothing up or down, is a type of harassment. What can you do to stop this kind of thing?”

Student: “Don’t accept it if you see it happening. Tell the person to stop or report them.” 

Teacher prompt: “A common form of harassment is spreading hurtful gossip about others. Is this type of bullying any less harmful than physical bullying? How can it be stopped?”

Student: “Verbal and social bullying are just as harmful as physical bullying. There are legal consequences for physical assault and for verbal harassment. If we hear it or see it, we should not accept it. It is up to everyone to make sure that this is not an acceptable thing to do.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours C2.3 explain how preoccupation with body image can contribute to substance abuse (e.g., misuse of supplements, vitamins, diuretics, diet pills, laxatives, or steroids to alter appearance), and demonstrate the ability to make informed choices about caring for their bodies [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What are the dangers of using substances to alter body shape? What is a healthier alternative?”

Student: “Using substances to change body shape or to control weight is dangerous because of the hazards associated with different substances. Diet pills and laxatives can cause dehydration. Steroids have many side effects, including increased irritability, aggressiveness, mood swings, acne, changes in sex organs, hair loss, and addiction. Prolonged use of high dosages can lead to organ damage. A balanced combination of healthy eating and physical activity is a safer and healthier alternative to using drugs.”

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

By the end of Grade 7, students will:

Healthy Eating

C3.1 demonstrate an understanding of personal and external factors that affect people’s food choices and eating routines (e.g., personal: likes and dislikes, busy schedules, food allergies or sensitivities, personal values, cultural practices or teachings; external: family budget, cost of foods, type of food available at home, at school, or in the community), and identify ways of encouraging healthier eating practices 

Teacher prompt: “How can people make healthy food choices if their choices are limited by a dislike of certain foods, by a food allergy, by personal beliefs about ethical food choices, by cultural preferences or religious food rules, or by budget limitations?”

Student: “Some limitations can be removed or overcome. People often dislike certain foods without ever having tried them. We should always consider at least trying a food before rejecting it. Often we can learn to like a food by having it prepared or served in a different way. In other cases, we just have to work within the limitations. A lot of tasty food choices are available for people who are making ethical choices or following religious and cultural food rules, or who have allergies. If we have a limited budget, we can still eat well by making careful food choices. Packaged foods are usually more expensive and less nutritious than fresh foods cooked at home. Local produce can be relatively inexpensive in season, and it is more nutritious than imported or packaged fruits and vegetables.”

Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C3.2 analyse the personal and societal implications of issues related to substance use and addictive behaviours (e.g., effect of technology dependence on school and workplace performance, risks associated with chewing tobacco, effects of second-hand smoke on non-smokers and children, legal and health implications of underage drinking, body damage and reputation loss among athletes as a result of the use of steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs; risk of HIV/AIDS with intravenous drug use; risk of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder [FASD] as a result of alcohol abuse during pregnancy) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Underage drinking is a concern in our school. Who can be harmed by underage drinking, and how?”

Student: “Underage drinking can be harmful to the person doing it because it can lead to legal charges and physical and emotional harm. Alcohol abuse is connected to violence in relationships and to unwanted pregnancies, so other people are hurt by it. Intoxication can also lead to risky behaviour that can result in injury or death. Alcohol poisoning can even be fatal. Underage drinking can be harmful to family members and the community because of the personal injuries or property damage that can result from actions or behaviour associated with impaired judgement, including car crashes. Irresponsible behaviour can damage not only the reputation of the person involved but also the reputation of teenagers in general. Underage drinkers also risk losing the trust of their parents and other adults.”

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998) (Table content from page 184)

OVERALL EXPECTATION By the end of Grade 7, students will:

• describe age-appropriate matters related to sexuality (e.g., the need to develop good interpersonal skills, such as the ability to communicate effectively with the opposite sex).

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS 

By the end of Grade 7, students will: 
• explain the male and female reproductive systems as they relate to fertilization;
• distinguish between the facts and myths associated with menstruation, spermatogenesis, and fertilization;
• identify the methods of transmission and the symptoms of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), and ways to prevent them; 
• use effective communication skills (e.g., refusal skills, active listening) to deal with various relationships and situations;
• explain the term abstinence as it applies to healthy sexuality;
• identify sources of support with regard to issues related to healthy sexuality (e.g., parents/guardians, doctors).

GRADE 8

Note: The teacher prompts and student responses contained in this curriculum are provided to illustrate the intended learning – the concepts that students should understand and the skills they are to acquire – in connection with the particular expectation. The student responses are not intended to illustrate the voice of students or speech patterns, syntax, or word choice typical of students in the different grades.

LIVING SKILLS 

Student learning related to the Living Skills expectations takes place in the context of learning related to the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands, and should be assessed and evaluated within these contexts.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

1. demonstrate personal and interpersonal skills and the use of critical and creative thinking processes as they acquire knowledge and skills in connection with the expectations in the Active Living, Movement Competence, and Healthy Living strands for this grade.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

1. Living Skills

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

Personal Skills (PS)* 

1.1 use self-awareness and self-monitoring skills to help them understand their strengths and needs, take responsibility for their actions, recognize sources of stress, and monitor their own progress, as they participate in various physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: explain how knowing themselves – their likes, dislikes, strengths, and abilities – can help them determine which healthrelated and skill-related components of fitness to focus on when developing their fitness plan; Movement Competence: monitor improvements in their body control as they apply their understanding of the phases of movement – preparation, execution, follow-through – to the refinement of a variety of movement skills; Healthy Living: describe the importance of self-awareness in developing stress-management strategies)

1.2 use adaptive, management, and coping skills to help them respond to the various challenges they encounter as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: manage their improvement of different health-related components of fitness by monitoring the frequency of their physical activity, the intensity of their activity, the types of activities they choose, and the length of time they are being active; Movement Competence: experiment with shifting weight and changing body position to find ways to make smoother transitions when performing a series of balances with a partner; Healthy Living: identify the type of support that is available to help with the various physical, emotional, cultural, social, and psychological issues that can arise in connection with sexuality and sexual health)

* The abbreviation(s) for the three categories of living skills – PS, IS, and CT – appear in square brackets at the end of expectations, in strands A–C, to which those skills are clearly connected. (See pp. 18–21 for a discussion of living skills.)

Interpersonal Skills (IS)*

1.3 communicate effectively, using verbal or non-verbal means, as appropriate, and interpret information accurately as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living (e.g., Active Living: give examples of how to communicate information clearly and concisely in an emergency situation; Movement Competence: congratulate opponents on a good play in a sincere way; Healthy Living:make adjustments to suit particular audiences – parents, peers, younger students, community members – when communicating to promote healthy eating)

1.4 apply relationship and social skills as they participate in physical activities, develop movement competence, and acquire knowledge and skills related to healthy living to help them interact positively with others, build healthy relationships, and become effective team members (e.g., Active Living: cooperate with others by respecting their choice of activities; encourage others when participating in activities like cross-country running; Movement Competence: work with a partner to try out different types of passes to evade opponents; Healthy Living: explain the positive aspects and the risks associated with close personal relationships and different levels of physical intimacy) 

Critical and Creative Thinking (CT)*

1.5 use a range of critical and creative thinking skills and processes to assist them in making connections, planning and setting goals, analysing and solving problems, making decisions, and evaluating their choices in connection with learning in health and physical education (e.g., Active Living: track and analyse changes in their health-related components of fitness over a designated period of time, and make any necessary adjustments in their fitness plans; plan ways to promote the involvement of all the students in the school in “healthy schools” activities such as litterless lunch programs and active recess activities; Movement Competence: explain how developing movement competence and building confidence influence the extent to which people participate in physical activity; Healthy Living: analyse potentially dangerous situations and devise solutions for making them safer)

A. ACTIVE LIVING

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

A1. participate actively and regularly in a wide variety of physical activities, and demonstrate an understanding of how personal motivational factors can be used to encourage participation in physical activity;
A2. demonstrate an understanding of the importance of being physically active, and apply physical fitness concepts and practices that contribute to healthy, active living;
A3. demonstrate responsibility for their own safety and the safety of others as they participate in physical activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

A1. Active Participation

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

A1.1 actively participate according to their capabilities in a wide variety of program activities (e.g., individual, small-group, and large-group activities; movement and rhythmic activities; dance; outdoor pursuits) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “In the next ten minutes, you will have the opportunity to go to three different fitness stations. Think about what stations you will choose to visit.”

Student: “I am going to pick two stations that connect to my fitness goals and one for fun. I am going to go to the exercise band station because I need to work on my arm strength. I am going to go to the stability ball station because I am working on my core strength and balance. I’m going to pick skipping as my third station because my friend and I are having a contest to see who can skip rope the longest without stopping.”

A1.2 demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to their personal enjoyment of being active (e.g., being able to adapt activities to suit individual needs and preferences; having a choice of activities and choices within activities; being comfortable with the activities, both socially and emotionally; being able to take part in activities in a natural environment; being able to take part in activities that are culturally relevant), as they participate in a diverse range of physical activities in a variety of indoor and outdoor environments [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “In class, we play in different groups to experience working with different people who have different skill levels. What kinds of groups do you find most comfortable to participate in?”

Student: “I’m comfortable playing with people who are at my skill level, but I also like playing with people who are better than I am, because it gives me a good challenge and I can learn from playing with them.” 

Teacher prompt: “Activities are more enjoyable when you can play at a level that is challenging but still not too difficult. How does this badminton activity do this?”

Student: “With this activity, you can choose to serve the shuttle from any of three lines. If you choose the distance that allows you to get the shuttle over the net most of the time and into one of the three areas marked on the floor with pylons, then you are choosing the distance that is not too easy and not too hard.”

A1.3 demonstrate an understanding of factors that motivate personal participation in physical activities every day (e.g., gaining health benefits, including release from stress; having interpersonal interactions; becoming more independent in daily living activities; experiencing personal enjoyment), and explain how these factors can be used to influence others (e.g., friends, family, members of the community) to be physically active [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How can your participation in physical activity have an impact on others?”

Students: “By being active, you can be a good role model and influence others. At school I am a fitness buddy for a Grade 2 student. Our classes get together and we help the younger students participate in physical activities.” “Sometimes just by participating, you can motivate others to join you. Because I play water polo, my younger sister wants to try it.” “On the weekends when I go for a bike ride, my father often comes with me. He might not go out on his own if I were not going.”

A2. Physical Fitness

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA): participate in sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity, with appropriate warm-up and cool-down activities, to the best of their ability for a minimum of twenty minutes each day (e.g., capture the flag, four-corner soccer, ball fitness activities) [PS]

A2.2 recognize the difference between health-related components of personal fitness (i.e., cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility) and skill-related components (i.e., balance, agility, power, reaction time, speed, and coordination), and explain how to use training principles to enhance both components [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How do you use training principles, such as considering the frequency and intensity of your workout and the timing and types of activities you choose, to improve your health-related fitness, particularly cardiorespiratory fitness? What does Canada’s Physical Activity Guide for Youth recommend?”

Student: “I need to decide what activities to do, and how often and how long I need to be active to get the fitness benefits I want. To improve my cardiorespiratory fitness, I need to choose activities that will raise my heart rate and make my heart and lungs work harder. Doing something like swimming for forty minutes three days a week, for example, would improve my cardiorespiratory fitness. The physical activity guide recommends that young people improve their fitness by increasing the time they currently spend on physical activity each day and reducing non-active time.” 

Teacher prompt: “Health-related components of fitness contribute to your overall health and well-being. Skill-related components of fitness help improve the quality of your movements during activity. Agility is a skill-related component of fitness. Explain what agility is. Why is it important?”

Student: “Agility is the ability to change directions and change smoothly and easily from one movement to another. It is helpful when playing sports like soccer or basketball but also when participating in recreational activities like in-line skating or skateboarding. Having good agility helps you move more smoothly and efficiently and makes the activity more fun.”

A2.3 assess their level of health-related fitness (i.e., cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility) during various physical activities and monitor changes in fitness levels over time (e.g., by tracking heart rates, recovery time, how they feel during and after activity, level of participation; noting increase in range of motion when doing yoga stretches; tracking increases in the number of repetitions when doing arm curls with exercise bands) [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How has monitoring your work on different fitness components Zhelped improve your fitness?”

Student: “Seeing improvements over time has given me encouragement to keep working and become even more fit. Tracking my progress on different components has also helped me focus on those that need more work, so my overall fitness has become better.”

A2.4 develop, implement, and revise a personal plan to meet short- and long-term health-related fitness and physical activity goals [PS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What have you chosen as your goal? When setting your goal and developing your plan to achieve it, consider your time frame as well as your assessment information. Is your goal short-term or long-term? How do you know that your goal is realistic? How will you know whether you’ve achieved your goal? What will help you achieve your goal? How will achieving this goal help you?”

Student: “I’m working at improving my long-distance running/wheeling to improve my overall fitness. I want to run/wheel the 1500-metre event at the track meet in the spring. I am also thinking of doing a 10K charity run/wheel. I think my goal is realistic. It is October, so this is a long-term goal – and I have time to train. And I did complete the 1500-metre event last year, although it was fairly challenging. Here is my plan to accomplish my goal: I plan to practise three times a week for the next ten weeks. And if I work with a partner, I think I will be more successful, because my partner can give me tips, suggestions, and encouragement. I can also talk with my partner about my plan and consider whether I need to change anything I am doing. I don’t have a goal to complete the race in any set time. Finishing the race will be my goal. I will definitely be more fit and I will be really proud of myself if I can do this.”

A3. Safety 

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

A3.1 demonstrate behaviours and apply procedures that maximize their safety and that of others (e.g., following appropriate procedures and guidelines; demonstrating social responsibility; encouraging others to act safely; wearing sunscreen, long sleeves, sunglasses, and a hat to limit UV exposure) in a variety of physical activity settings (e.g., school, community recreational facilities, outdoor recreational venues) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Other than school facilities, what are some local indoor and outdoor recreational venues in our community that we can use for physical activities? What safety considerations do you need to think about, whether you are participating in physical activity at school or in the community?”

Student: “We have several parks, including a skateboard park, as well as fields, hiking trails, bike paths, a rink, and a lake that is close by. Wherever we participate in physical activities, we need to be aware of ourselves and others in our surroundings. Different activities have specific safety considerations and rules that we need to think about and follow. We also need to use and wear the proper safety equipment for these activities. Using good judgement, thinking for yourself, following posted rules and signs, and thinking before you act are good general guidelines.”

A3.2 demonstrate a basic understanding of how to deal with emergency situations that may occur while participating in physical activity (e.g., remain calm, know when more help is needed or when to call 9-1-1, know where to get more help, know how to recognize symptoms of asthma or anaphylaxis, move objects that may be a safety hazard away from the injured person, know what an automated external defibrillator (AED) is and be aware of where they are located in community facilities) [PS, CT]

B. MOVEMENT COMPETENCE: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

B1. perform movement skills, demonstrating an understanding of the basic requirements of the skills and applying movement concepts as appropriate, as they engage in a variety of physical activities;
B2. apply movement strategies appropriately, demonstrating an understanding of the components of a variety of physical activities, in order to enhance their ability to participate successfully in those activities.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

B1.1 perform smooth transfers of weight and rotations, in relation to others and equipment, in a variety of situations involving static and dynamic balance (e.g., display control while stepping and turning on and off steps during an aerobic routine; move smoothly between positions and twists during a Pilates activity; work with a partner to create a sequence that involves holding a partner’s partial or whole weight when transfer ring from one balance to another) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “Create a series of tableaux that demonstrates the different phases of your favourite physical activity, such as the three phases involved in sprinting or in swinging a cricket bat, showing how you get ready, showing the action itself, and showing the follow-through. Be sure to show three distinct movements and a smooth transition from each movement to the next.”

B1.2 perform a wide variety of locomotor movements, with and without equipment, while responding to a variety of external stimuli (e.g., approach, take off, and land when doing a triple jump into a pit; strive to beat a time record in orienteering; choreograph a dance sequence in response to music; perform step aerobics at different tempos; change styles of cross-country skiing depending on snow and terrain conditions, using a skate technique on open, flat sections and a classic technique on narrower trails) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “How might you modify the movements in your dance sequence as the music changes or as you develop new movement sequences using different types of music?”

Student: “With slower, more lyrical music, my movements would be slower and bigger. With fast music, I would use quicker and stronger steps in response to the fast tempo.”

B1.3 use and combine sending, receiving, and retaining skills in response to a variety of external stimuli, while applying basic principles of movement* (e.g., shift weight and use all joints for maximum force when throwing against the wind; put an appropriate spin on the ball when throwing a football or rolling a ball around an obstacle in front of a target; sprint to catch a pass that has been thrown short to an open space away from defenders; while moving to music, transfer a rhythmic gymnastics ball from one hand to the other, using the momentum of the movement to hold on to the ball; show awareness of others’ positions when taking off and landing in a basketball layup; move body to retain an object in flag tag while evading defenders; keep the basketball on their lap while moving and evading a defender in wheelchair basketball) [PS, IS] 

Teacher prompt: “How will you adjust for the wind when throwing an object?”

Student: “I will need to throw harder or softer, or adjust my aim, depending on the direction of the wind.”

B1.4 demonstrate an understanding of the phases of movement (i.e., preparation, execution, followthrough) and apply this understanding to the refinement of movement skills in a variety of physical activities (e.g., assume a ready position, swing, and follow through in a badminton stroke; reach, pull, and recover when doing the back crawl) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “How does the preparation phase for sprinting differ from the preparation phase for cross-country running?”

Student: “With sprinting, you stay low to the ground and prepare to explode from the start. With cross-country running, you want to start in more of an upright position, and you start more slowly because you want to conserve energy and pace yourself all the way through the run.”

B2. Movement Strategies 

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

B2.1 demonstrate an understanding of the components of a range of physical activities (e.g., movement skills, game structures, basic rules and guidelines, conventions of fair play and etiquette), and apply this understanding as they participate in a variety of physical activities in indoor and outdoor environments [IS, CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Working in your small group, consider what rule you could change in this activity to make it more or less challenging.”

Student: “When playing ultimate disc, we could change the rules so that everyone has to throw with their non-dominant hand. That gives everyone good practice and also makes the play a little more equal because it makes it challenging for everyone.” 

Teacher prompt: “Now change the activity again, considering how you might adapt the activity for a person in your group who has different needs; for example, you may adapt the activity for someone who doesn’t understand the language or someone who may not understand the rules of the activity.”

Student: “We might change the rules to make it a lot simpler – for example, we would not worry about the rules about the number of seconds you can hold the disc or the number of steps you are allowed to take with the disc. Once everyone seems to understand the game, we could add those rules back in. Or we might play the game with a person who needs help paired up with a more experienced player, or with everyone working in pairs, so people can help each other follow the game. In this variation, both players would handle the disc – for example, one catches it and the other throws it – before it goes on to another pair.”

* See page 26 for background information and a description of movement principles.

B2.2 demonstrate an understanding of how movement skills, concepts, and strategies are transferable across different physical activities within various categories* (e.g., individual, target, net/wall, striking/fielding, territory), and identify skills, concepts, and strategies that they found effective while participating in a variety of physical activities in different categories [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Think about activities you do at school and those you do on your own time. How can knowing how to do an activity well affect your performance in that activity and in other activities?”

Students: “At school, we did cross-country running. I also go running sometimes at home. Learning how to pace myself when I run has made it a lot easier for me to run in my neighbourhood.” “We worked on our stability and balance when we did fitness and developmental gymnastics at school. My balance has improved and that has helped me with trail riding when I am working on strategies for riding over logs and bumps. The better I get, the more confident I get and the more I am able to do. I can also use the skills, like balance, and the strategies, like ways of negotiating bumps and jumps, when I do other activities, like skateboarding.” 

Teacher prompt: “What are some common elements of a variety of individual activities, such as yoga, qigong, and track and field? What about common elements among team sports such as soccer, rugby, and softball?”

Student: “Activities like yoga and qigong involve core strength, balance, and flexibility. Paying attention to breathing is also really important. There is also a certain etiquette that you should follow in these activities – for example, you shouldn’t talk while doing the activity. You should focus on your own practice. In team activities like soccer, rugby, and softball, you use sending, receiving, and carrying skills. You need an understanding of the basic rules. You need to be aware of the boundaries and work together as a team.”

B2.3 apply a variety of tactical solutions to increase chances of success as they participate in physical activities (e.g., individual activities: use conscious breathing to enhance movement during a fitness activity; toss balls or beanbags in an even pattern and keep eyes focused at the peak of the toss when learning to juggle with three objects; target activities: position balls or rocks in a place that makes it difficult for the opposing team to score in games such as bocce or curling; net/wall activities: choose the type of shot and consider the placement of the shot to gain an offensive advantage; striking/ fielding activities: send the object away from the defenders to allow for more time to score before the fielders retrieve the object; territory activities: send a pass that places the object closer to the goal; keep their body between the object and the defender while moving; practise using a fast transition from offence to defence) [IS, CT]** 

* See pages 27–29 for background information and a description of various categories of physical activities. ** The types of living skills associated with students’ application of tactical solutions differ with the students’ developmental stage. Critical and creative thinking skills and processes are involved in choosing or devising tactical solutions at any age. At the different stages of development, however, students are able to focus on applying critical and creative thinking to a greater or lesser degree. In Grades 1–3, students are also occupied with developing personal skills; in Grades 4–6, most students are ready to focus on interpersonal skills as they apply tactical solutions; and in Grades 7 and 8, most are prepared to focus their energy on the thinking skills involved (e.g., working as a team to choose tactics that will result in the greatest success, adjusting play in response to an opponent’s actions or conditions in the environment).

Teacher prompt: “How do you use a breathing rhythm, planning when to inhale and when to exhale, to help you when doing activities such as push-ups, curl-ups, and stretches?”

Student: “I find it easier to do curl-ups when I concentrate on breathing in when I’m lying back and on breathing out when I’m sitting up.” 

Teacher prompt: “What are some important ideas that transfer across different types of activities done in the natural environment, such as canoeing, hiking, and skiing?”

Student: “When taking part in any activity in the natural environment, you should always respect the environment and all who live in it. Your activities should not harm or significantly change the environment. You should also take steps to ensure your safety. Monitor the weather conditions, have an emergency action plan, and always make sure others know where you will be and when you will return.”

C. HEALTHY LIVING

Chart from page 196 is omitted, text only
Healthy Living Learning Summary for Grade 8: Key Topics*

Topic
Healthy Eating
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Nutrients

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Food choices – criteria [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Promoting healthy ating [CT]


Topic
Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Reducing risk of injuries, death [CT]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Assessing situations for potential danger [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Impact of violent behaviours; supports [CT]

Topic
Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.3 Warning signs, consequences

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Mental health, stress management [PS]

Topic
Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 201) - GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998)

* This chart is extracted from the complete Grade 1–8 Healthy Living Learning Summary chart on pages 206–207. The topics are listed on the left, and the focus of each expectation is summarized briefly, to give teachers a quick overview of the strand.

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

C1. demonstrate an understanding of factors that contribute to healthy development;
C2. demonstrate the ability to apply health knowledge and living skills to make reasoned decisions and take appropriate actions relating to their personal health and well-being;
C3. demonstrate the ability to make connections that relate to health and well-being – how their choices and behaviours affect both themselves and others, and how factors in the world around them affect their own and others’ health and well-being.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

Healthy Eating

C1.1 demonstrate an understanding of different types of nutrients (e.g., macronutrients and micronutrients) and their functions 

Teacher prompt: “Different kinds of nutrients are needed to achieve optimal health and prevent disease. Nutrients can be divided into two types – macronutrients and micronutrients. What are these, and why is each kind of nutrient needed for good health?”

C1. Understanding Health Concepts

Student: “Macro means big. Macronutrients include carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. They provide our bodies with energy for growth and activity. Micro means small. Micronutrients are the vitamins and minerals in our food. They help regulate body functions such as vision, healing, and muscle movement.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C1.2 identify situations that could lead to injury or death (e.g., head injuries in contact sports, spinal cord injuries from falls or diving into unknown water, injuries in car accidents) and describe behaviours that can help to reduce risk (e.g., wearing protective gear, especially helmets; thinking before acting; avoiding conflicts that could lead to violence; avoiding diving into unknown water; being cautious when driving or riding ATVs, tractors, boats, or snowmobiles; being aware of food safety when cooking and preparing food) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Unintentional injury is a leading cause of death for children and youth in Canada. Adolescents need to be aware of the potential results associated with higher-risk activities. What are some possible consequences of injuries to the spinal cord or head?”

Student: “Spinal cord injuries can cause complete or partial paralysis. Severe head injuries can cause brain damage that may result in impairments of movement, sight, hearing, speech, cognitive functioning, or sensation or that may even lead to death.” Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C1.3 identify and describe the warning signs of substance misuse or abuse, addictions, and related behaviours (e.g., changes in behaviour, gradual withdrawal from social circles, a drop in academic performance) and the consequences that can occur (e.g., aggressive behaviours related to alcohol use that can lead to gender-based violence, dating violence, or sexual assault; financial problems resulting from online gambling; overdose as a result of misuse of prescription medications, including pain relievers; inability to make good decisions as a result of drug use; binge drinking and alcohol poisoning; injury, death, or legal charges resulting from accidents caused by impaired driving; selfharming behaviours, including cutting, related to mental illnesses such as depression that are exacerbated by substance abuse; fetal alcohol spectrum disorder [FASD] in children as a result of alcohol abuse by the mother during pregnancy)

C2. Making Healthy Choices

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

Healthy Eating

C2.1 evaluate personal food choices on the basis of a variety of criteria, including serving size, nutrient content, energy value, and ingredients (e.g., fats, carbohydrates, protein, vitamins and minerals, calories, additives, allergens), preparation method, and other factors that can affect health and well-being [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “Why is paying attention to nutrients more valuable than counting calories?”

Student: “Paying attention to nutrients helps you focus on eating in a balanced way. Calories are only one thing to consider and, by themselves, don’t provide information about nutrition. By following Canada’s Food Guide, I can make sure that I am meeting my energy and nutrient needs. It’s important to get all of the different nutrients that my body needs. By considering nutrient content, I can make sure I get enough vitamins and minerals – for example, I need to eat orange vegetables like carrots and orange peppers to get Vitamin A. And if I make soup with milk instead of water, I’ll get more calcium and Vitamin D.”

Teacher: “Serving size is one thing to consider when making food choices. How many servings of fruits and vegetables are recommended for teenagers?” Student: “Canada’s Food Guide recommends that teens eat seven to eight servings of vegetables and fruit per day.” 

Teacher prompt: “If you do not eat breakfast, how does that affect how you feel during the day?”

Student: “I feel sluggish in the morning, and I’m starving by ten o’clock. When I’m so hungry, I’m more likely to eat less nutritious food at break.” 

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C2.2 demonstrate the ability to assess situations for potential dangers (e.g., getting into a car with a stranger or an impaired, unlicensed, or inexperienced driver; dependencies or coercion in dating relationships; joining gangs; participating in violence; attending a party where alcohol or drugs are being used; using cosmetic procedures or treatments such as piercing, tattooing, crash diets, or artificial tanning that involve potential health risks), and apply strategies for avoiding dangerous situations [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “What are some things you could do instead of getting into a car with a driver who has been drinking?” Student: “I could call a family member or friend, stay over where I am, walk home with a friend if there is a safe route, or take a bus or taxi if one is available. I should have a plan and, if I can, carry money or a phone, so that I do not have to depend on someone else to get home safely.” 

Teacher prompt: “What are some things to be aware of in a relationship to keep yourself safe?”

Student: “Thinking about what makes a relationship healthier is a good start. Things that could lead to danger in relationships include an uneven balance of power in the relationship and situations that involve alcohol or drugs. I can stay safer by defining my own limits, listening to my gut feelings, and letting others know what I am doing and where I am going. If something does not feel good or right, I need to have the confidence to tell the other person to stop immediately.” Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours

C2.3 explain how stress affects mental health and emotional well-being, and demonstrate an understanding of how to use a variety of strategies for relieving stress and caring for their mental health (e.g., engaging in physical activity, listening to music, resting, meditating, talking with a trusted individual, practising smudging) [PS] 

Teacher prompt: “Maintaining good mental health and emotional well-being involves balancing the different aspects of life: the physical, intellectual, social, emotional, and spiritual. It involves the ability to think, feel, act, and interact in a way that allows you to enjoy life and cope with challenges that arise. Signs of potential mental health difficulties can include being frequently sad or depressed, anxious, or rebellious; having difficulty paying attention; having problems with eating, sleeping, or getting along at school; or being addicted to substances. Everyone is vulnerable to emotional or mental stresses. What can you do to take care of your mental health?”

Student: “Being aware of my feelings and monitoring them can help. So can understanding that anyone can experience mental health difficulties and that getting help makes a big difference.” 

Teacher prompt: “Stress can be positive and negative. Stress can motivate you to get things done, but it is also connected to things over which you have less control, like illness, death, or divorce, financial concerns, or environmental issues. Identify a situation in which students often feel stressed. How can you manage stress effectively?”

Student: “Students often feel stressed when they have too much to do. To cope, you need to plan your time and set priorities. Do the most important things first. Include some time for taking breaks and being active. Check off what you get done as you do it. Plan with a friend, if that helps you. Stress can be managed or relieved in many ways. Some people find that taking some personal time to reflect and think and do quiet things like rest, write, read, meditate, or listen to music works best for them. Others find that being physically active or interacting with others by talking through problems is helpful. Different things work for different people, and you have to find the way that works best for you. Some cultures have special ways of relieving stress. Some First Nation people, for example, use smudging to relieve stress. This is a practice in which people fan smoke from herbs like sage or sweetgrass over their bodies to cleanse them of bad feelings and get rid of negative thoughts and energy. Afterwards, they feel renewed, physically, emotionally, mentally, and spiritually.”

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

Healthy Eating

C3.1 identify strategies for promoting healthy eating within the school, home, and community (e.g., implementing school healthy food policies, launching healthy-eating campaigns, choosing healthy food items to sell in fundraising campaigns, getting involved in family meal planning, learning food preparation skills, urging local restaurants to highlight healthy food choices) [CT] 

Teacher prompt: “How could you promote healthy eating at home?”

Student: “I could help with meal planning, shopping, and preparation, or discuss healthy eating with my family.”

Teacher: “Where can you get more information about healthy eating in your community?”

Student: “The public health unit, registered dieticians, medical clinics, family health centres, and reputable websites are all good sources of information about healthy eating.”

Teacher: “What might you do to promote healthy eating at school?”

Student: “I could ask about healthy food policies and join clubs or groups to support healthy eating at school. I could model healthy eating. As a class, we could put together information about healthier food choices to share with younger students. Instead of selling chocolates to raise funds, we could do something healthy like have a dance-a-thon.”

Personal Safety and Injury Prevention

C3.2 analyse the impact of violent behaviours, including aggression, anger, swarming, dating violence, and gender-based or racially based violence, on the person being targeted, the perpetrator, and bystanders, and describe the role of support services in preventing violence (e.g., help lines, school counsellors, social workers, youth programs, shelters, restorative justice programs) [CT]) 

Teacher prompt: “Managing emotions in heated situations is an essential skill. Consider this situation: Students are playing basketball on the playground; someone gets pushed aggressively and tempers flare. What is the impact on those playing and those watching?”

Student: “This situation could escalate into a fight. Someone could be hurt, and that could lead to suspension or assault charges and damage the relationships between the players on and off the court and in the classroom. It could scare or injure the people watching.” 

Teacher prompt: “Gender-based violence includes any form of behaviour – psychological, physical, and sexual – that is based on an individual’s gender and is intended to control, humiliate, or harm the individual. When we say ‘gender-based violence’, we are often referring to violence against women and girls. Can you give me some examples?”

Student: “It can include physical assault in a relationship, sexual assault, or rape. It can also include things like having your rear end pinched in the hallway, having your top pulled down or lifted up, or being held down and touched.”

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (1998) (Table content for page 201)

OVERALL EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

• identify the physical, emotional, interpersonal, and spiritual aspects of healthy sexuality (e.g., respect for life, ethical questions in relationships, contraception);
• identify local support groups and community organizations (e.g., public health offices) that provide information or services related to health and well-being;
• apply living skills (e.g., decision-making, problem-solving, and refusal skills) to respond to matters related to sexuality, drug use, and healthy eating habits.

SPECIFIC EXPECTATIONS

By the end of Grade 8, students will:

• explain the importance of abstinence as a positive choice for adolescents;
• identify symptoms, methods of transmission, prevention, and high-risk behaviours related to common STDs, HIV, and AIDS;
• identify methods used to prevent pregnancy;
• apply living skills (e.g., decision-making, assertiveness, and refusal skills) in making informed decisions, and analyse the consequences of engaging in sexual activities and using drugs;
• identify sources of support (e.g., parents/guardians, doctors) related to healthy sexuality issues. Printed on recycled paper

APPENDIX 

Learning Summaries by Strand

The charts on the following pages provide a summary of the key topics and/or skills, concepts, and strategies covered by the expectations in each strand from Grade 1 to Grade 8. The focus of each expectation is conveyed in just a few words, in order to give teachers a quick overview of the strand across all grades.

In a number of cases, indicated in the charts by means of shaded arrows, the topic of an expectation remains essentially the same across several grades. In these cases, grade-tograde variations in content are summarized in brief additional phrases. For example, the summary description in the Movement Competence chart for expectation B1.2 reads “jumping, hopping, and landing – maintaining control, landing safely, using different body actions, jumping for distance/height and from low heights”. Although the focus of the expectation from Grade 2 to Grade 5 remains the same (jumping, hopping, and landing), students in Grade 2 are expected to jump, hop, and land in control; students in Grade 3 learn to jump for distance and height; students in Grade 4 are focusing on landing in control when jumping from a low height; and students in Grade 5 are jumping for height and distance using a variety of body actions. In order to understand when specific requirements are introduced, readers must consult the expectations, examples, and teacher prompts in the body of the curriculum document. There, they will find indications of the specific, ageappropriate content, scope, and depth of coverage of the expectations in particular grades.

Some of the boxes, or cells, in the charts are shaded. Depending on the organizing principle of the chart, a shaded box may indicate that a particular expectation is not included in a given grade, or that there is a shift in topic in an expectation from one grade to the next, or that the topic is not considered from a particular perspective in a given grade (e.g., in Grade 1 in the Healthy Living chart, the topic Healthy Eating is considered from the perspective of “Understanding Health Concepts” and “Making Healthy Choices”, but not from the perspective of “Making Connections for Healthy Living”, so the cell in the last column is shaded).

Table from page 204 is omitted, text only

ACTIVE LIVING LEARNING SUMMARY: KEY TOPICS*

A1. Active Participation


Grade 1: A1.1 Participation in program activities, behaviours showing readiness [PS, IS]

Grade 1: A1.2 Enjoyment of activity (individual and small-group activities) [PS]
Grade 4: A1.2 Enjoyment of activity (individual, small-group, and leadup activities) [PS]
Grade 7: A1.2 Enjoyment of activity (diverse indoor/outdoor activities) [PS]

Grade 1: A1.3 Ways of being active [CT]
Grade 2: A1.3 Reasons for participating in physical activity [CT]
Grade 3: A1.3 Benefits of participating in physical activity [CT]
Grade 4: A1.3 Factors that motivate or challenge participation (in and outside of school) [CT]
Grade 8: A1.3 Application of motivating factors, influencing others [CT]

A2. Physical Fitness
Grade 1: A2.1 Daily physical activity (DPA) – sustained, moderate to vigorous activity, 20 minutes per day, including warm-up and cool-down [PS]

Grade 1: A2.2 Health benefits of being physically active [CT]
Grade 2: A2.2 Activities to improve heart and lung health
Grade 3: A2.2 Benefits of improved cardiorespiratory fitness [CT]
Grade 4: A2.2 Physical activity and health-related fitness [CT]
Grade 7: A2.2 Factors affecting fitness; application of training principles [CT]
Grade 8: A2.2 Health-related and skill-related components of fitness; use of training principles to enhance fitness [CT]

Grade 2: A2.3 Physical signs of exertion [CT]
Grade 3: A2.3 Exertion, selfassessment [PS, CT]
Grade 4: A2.3 Exertion, selfassessment, intrinsic, extrinsic factors [PS, CT]
Grade 5: A2.3 Assessment and monitoring of healthrelated fitness [PS, CT]

Grade 2: A2.4 Personal and group goal setting related to physical activity [PS, IS, CT]
Grade 3: A2.4 Developing and acting on personal physical activity goals [PS, CT]
Grade 5: A2.4 Developing and implementing personal fitness plans [PS, CT]
Grade 7: A2.4 Developing a fitness plan to meet a fitness goal [PS, CT]

A3. Safety
Grade 1: A3.1 Behaviours and procedures that maximize safety of self and others [PS, IS]

Grade 1: A3.2 Environmental safety risks [PS, CT]
Grade 2: A3.2 Safety precautions for selves and others, including those with medical conditions [PS, CT]
Grade 3: A3.2 Responding to accidents and injuries [PS, CT]
Grade 4: A3.2 Prevention of accidents and injuries [PS, CT]
Grade 5: A3.2 Minimizing environmental health risks [PS, CT]
Grade 6: A3.2 Treating minor injuries [PS, CT]
Grade 7: A3.2 Procedures for anticipating and responding to outdoor hazards [PS, CT]
Grade 8: A3.2 Responding to emergency situations [PS, CT]

End of Table

* See page 203 for important information about the content, purpose, and design of this chart.

Table from page 205 is omitted, text only

MOVEMENT COMPETENCE LEARNING SUMMARY: SKILLS, CONCEPTS, AND STRATEGIES*

B1. Movement Skills and Concepts**

Grade 1, 2 and 3: B1.1 Static balance – using different body parts, levels, shapes, working with equipment and others, making transitions [PS]
• Concepts: body and space, later expanding to include relationship

Grade 5 and 6: B1.1 Static & dynamic balance 
– weight transfers, changing speed, levels, with/without equipment, alone/with others [PS, IS]
• Concepts: all, progressing to a focus on effort and relationship

Grade 7 and 8: B1.1 Static & dynamic balance
– weight transfers, rotations, with others and equipment [PS, IS]
• Concepts: all, with focus on effort and relationship


Grade 2 to 5: B1.2 Jumping, hopping, and landing – maintaining control, landing safely, using different body actions, jumping for distance/height and from low heights [PS]
• Concepts: body, later expanding to include effort and relationship

Locomotion

Grade 1: B1.2 Moving and stopping safely, in control, with awareness of others and equipment [PS] 
• Concepts: body, space, relationship

Grade 6: B1.2 Movement combinations – wide variety, with/without equipment, alone/with others, using different speeds, pathways, directions, levels [PS, IS]
• Concepts: all, progressing from body to space to effort to relationship

Grade 7: B1.2 Movement combinations – with/without equipment, in response to external stimuli [PS]
• Concepts: space, effort and relationship


Grade 1: B1.2 Movement combinations – wide variety, with/without equipment, alone/with others, using different speeds, pathways, directions, levels [PS, IS]
• Concepts: all, progressing from body to space to effort to relationship

Grade 2 and 3: B1.2 Movement combinations – with/without equipment, in response to external stimuli [PS]
• Concepts: space, effort and relationship

Grade 4 and 5: B1.3 Movement combinations – with/ without equipment, alone/with others, using different speeds, pathways, directions, levels [PS, IS]
• Concepts: all, progressing from body to space to effort to relationship

Manipulation

Grade 1: B1.4 Sending objects – using different shapes/sizes, levels, body parts [PS]
• Concepts: body, space, building to include relationship

Grade 3: B1.4 Sending and receiving – using different shapes/sizes, levels, speeds, distances, body parts/ equipment [PS, IS]
• Concepts: all movement concepts

Grade 4 and 5: B1.4 Sending and receiving – using different shapes/sizes, levels, speeds, body parts/equipment [PS, IS]
• Concepts: all movement concepts, movement principles

Grade 6: B1.4 Retaining objects – using different shapes/sizes, body parts, equipment [PS, IS]
• Concepts: focus on space, effort, relationship

Grade 7: B1.4 Phases of movement [PS]

Grade 1: B1.5 Receiving objects – using different shapes/ sizes, levels, body parts [PS, IS]
• Concepts: body, space

Grade 3: B1.5 Retaining objects – using different shapes/ sizes, body parts, equipment [PS, IS]
• Concepts: body, progressing to space, then awareness, then relationship

B2. Movement Strategies

Grade 1: B2.1 Activity components – individual and small-group activities [IS]

Grade 4: B2.1 Activity components – variety of lead-up, recreational, fitness, and dance activities [IS, CT]

Grade 7 and 8: B2.1 Activity components – variety of lead-up, recreational, fitness, and dance activities in diverse indoor/outdoor environments [IS, CT]

Grade 4: B2.2 Categories of games and activities – common features and strategies [CT]

Grade 8: B2.2 Categories of games and activities – connection between skills, concepts, strategies [CT]

Grade 1: B2.2 Simple tactics to increase success in activities [PS, CT]

Grade 4: B2.3 Tactical solutions to increase success in activities [IS, CT]
End of Table

* See page 203 for important information about the content, purpose, and design of this chart.
** The movement skills are stability, locomotion, and manipulation. The movement concepts are body, space, effort, and relationship. See detailed information on pages 24–26. The chart is organized by skill category and grade. Movement concepts are outlined in the body of the chart as they relate to the development of each skill category.

Table from page 206 and 207 are omitted, text only

HEALTHY LIVING LEARNING SUMMARY: KEY TOPICS*

Grade 1
Topic: Healthy Eating
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Food for healthy bodies

C2. Making Healthy Choices: 
C2.1 Food groups, Canada’s Food Guide [CT]
C2.2 Hunger and thirst cues [PS]

Topic: Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Safe practices – personal safety [PS]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: 
C2.3 Caring and exploitive behaviours and feelings [IS]
C2.4 Safety at school [PS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Potential risks at home, in the community, outdoors [PS, CT]

Topic: Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Unhealthy habits, healthy alternatives [PS]

Topic: Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 98)

Grade 2
Topic: Healthy Eating
C2. Making Healthy Choices: 
C2.1 Canada’s Food Guide – healthy growth 
C2.2 Food choices (snacks, meals) [CT]

Topic: Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: 
C1.1 Personal safety – home and outdoors [PS]
C1.2 Food allergies

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Standing up for yourself [PS, IS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Relating to others [IS]

Topic: Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.3 Prescription/non-prescription medicines

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Medication, healthy alternatives [CT] 

Topic: Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 98)

Grade 3
Topic: Healthy Eating
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Food origins, nutritional value and environmental impact [CT]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Oral health, food choices [PS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Local and cultural foods, eating choices [CT]

Topic: Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Safety guidelines outside of class [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Real and fictional violence [IS]

Topic: Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Impact of use of legal/illegal substances

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Decision making –substance use/behaviours [CT]

Topic: Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 112)

Grade 4
Topic: Healthy Eating
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Nutrients

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Food choices, healthy-eating goals [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Food choices in various settings [CT]

Topic: Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: 
C1.2 Safe use of technology [IS]
C1.3 Bullying and abuse [IS]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Decision making – assessing risk [CT]

Topic: Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.4 Tobacco

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Decisions about smoking [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living:  C3.2 Short- and long-term effects of smoke

Topic: Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 132)

Grade 5
Topic: Healthy Eating
C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Nutrition facts tables, food labels [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Media influences – food choices [CT]

Topic: Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Supports – injury prevention, emergencies, bullying, violence [PS]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Strategies – threats to personal safety [PS, IS, CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Actions, self-concept [PS, IS]

Topic: Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Short- and long-term effects of alcohol use

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Refusal skills – alcohol use and other behaviours [IS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living:  C3.3 Decision to drink alcohol, influences [CT]

Topic: Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 147)

Grade 6
Topic: Healthy Eating
C2. Making Healthy Choices: 
C2.1 Influences on healthy eating [CT]
C2.2 Eating cues and guidelines [PS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Benefits of healthy eating/active living [CT]

Topic: Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Safe and positive social interaction, conflict management [PS, IS]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Responsibilities, risks – care for self and others, safety practices [PS, IS]

Topic: Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: 
C1.1 Effects of cannabis, illicit drugs
C1.2 Supports – substance use, addictive behaviours

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.4 Strategies, safe choices, influences, tobacco, alcohol, cannabis [CT] 

Topic: Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 163)

Grade 7
Topic: Healthy Eating
C2. Making Healthy Choices:  C2.1 Food choices and health problems [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Healthy eating practices and routines

Topic: Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Benefits and dangers – technology

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Impact – bullying/harassment [IS, CT]

Topic: Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Mental health, substances, support [PS]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Body image, substance use [PS, CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living:  C3.2 Implications of substance use and addictions [CT]

Topic: Growth and Development (1998) - (See p. 184)

Grade 8
Topic: Healthy Eating
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.1 Nutrients

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.1 Food choices – criteria [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.1 Promoting healthy eating [CT]

Topic: Personal Safety and Injury Prevention
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.2 Reducing risk of injuries, death [CT]

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.2 Assessing situations for potential danger [CT]

C3. Making Connections for Healthy Living: C3.2 Impact of violent behaviours; supports [CT]

Topic: Substance Use, Addictions, and Related Behaviours
C1. Understanding Health Concepts: C1.3 Warning signs, consequences

C2. Making Healthy Choices: C2.3 Mental health, stress management [PS]  

Topic: Growth and Development (1998) -  (See p. 201)

End of Table

* See page 203 for important information about the content, purpose, and design of this chart.

GLOSSARY

The following definitions of terms are intended to help teachers and parents use this document. abstinence. A conscious decision to refrain from a behaviour or activity. This document uses the term in reference to abstinence from all forms of sexual intercourse and other sexual activities.

abuse. Behaviour that is intended to intimidate, isolate, dominate, or control another person, which may be a single incident or a pattern of behaviour. Abusive behaviour includes physical abuse, sexual abuse and exploitation, neglect, emotional maltreatment, and exposure to domestic violence. active listening. A communication skill in which the listener focuses closely on the speaker’s verbal and nonverbal messages and summarizes these messages to confirm understanding.

active transportation. Any type of humanpowered transportation – walking, cycling, skateboarding, wheeling a wheelchair, and so on – used to get oneself or others from one place to another. Active transportation may include a combination of methods, such as combining human-powered motion with public transportation.

addiction. A physiological and psychological dependence on a substance or behaviour, such as alcohol or gambling.

aerobic activity. A type of exercise that increases the body’s demand for oxygen because of the continuous use of large muscles and a temporary increase in respiration and heart rate. Aerobic activity contributes to improving the efficiency of the heart, lungs, and circulatory system in using oxygen.

agility. A skill-related component of physical fitness that relates to the ability to change the position of the body with speed and accuracy while moving from one point to another. See also skill-related fitness.

allergies and sensitivities/intolerances. Types of reactions to foods and other substances or chemicals. Food allergies are caused by the body’s immune system reacting inappropriately to particular proteins in a food, whereas food intolerances are usually related to the body’s inability to digest particular foods. Some allergic reactions can be lifethreatening. See also anaphylaxis.

anaphylaxis. A serious allergic reaction that can be life-threatening. Food is the most common cause of anaphylaxis (most typically peanuts, tree nuts, seafood, and egg and milk products), but insect stings, medicine, latex, or exercise can also cause a reaction. (Adapted from Anaphylaxis Canada, “What Is Anaphylaxis?”, www.anaphylaxis.org/ content/whatis/anaphylaxis_is.asp [accessed February 3, 2010].)

assault. The intentional direct or indirect application of force to another person, or the attempt or threat to do so. (Adapted from the Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c. C-46, s. 265 (1).) 

automated external defibrillator (AED). A portable electronic device that an untrained person can use to check the heart rhythm of another person. It recognizes rhythms that are not regular and uses voice prompts and messages to guide the rescuer to use the machine to provide a shock to the heart. The shock helps the heart to re-establish a regular rhythm.

balance. A skill-related component of physical fitness that relates to the ability to maintain equilibrium while stationary (static balance) or moving (dynamic balance). See also skill-related fitness.

beep baseball. A striking/fielding game in which offensive players work in teams to strike a ball, then score runs by running to a base that is activated to make a sound or a beep. Fielding players work together with spotters, who help to identify ball position using a numbering system. The game is designed to be played by blind and visually impaired players along with a sighted pitcher and catcher.

bocce. A target game in which teams attempt to score by throwing (or “bowling”) larger balls as close as possible to a smaller ball (a “jack”).

body awareness. See movement concepts. breath sound check. A self-assessment tool in which participants can monitor the intensity of an exercise or activity. When participants can “hear their own breathing”, the intensity of the activity is moderate to vigorous and their heart rate will be between 55 and 85 per cent of their maximum heart rate.

bullying. A form of repeated, persistent, and aggressive behaviour directed at an individual or individuals that is intended to cause (or should be known to cause) fear and distress and/or harm to another person’s body, feelings, self-esteem, or reputation. Bullying occurs in a context where there is a real or perceived power imbalance. Bullying can occur in person or through the use of information and communication technologies (e.g., spreading rumours or hurtful images or comments by means of e-mail or text messaging, or on social media sites or personal websites).

cardiorespiratory endurance. A health-related component of physical fitness that involves the ability to perform sustained physical activity requiring considerable use of the circulatory and respiratory systems. Also referred to as cardiovascular endurance, aerobic fitness, or cardiorespiratory fitness. See also health-related fitness.

contraception. A term for a variety of methods used to prevent pregnancy, including barrier, hormonal, natural, and surgical methods. Some types of contraception also provide protection against sexually transmitted infections.

cool-down. The transitional process of returning the body to its normal state after being physically active. A cool-down may consist of slower, gentler movements and/or stretches.

coordination. A skill-related component of physical fitness that relates to the ability to combine sensory input with the movement of body parts in order to perform movement skills smoothly and efficiently. See also skill-related fitness.

core muscle strength. The ability of the core muscles – the muscles of the abdominal and back area – to support the spine and keep the body stable and balanced. Core muscles are involved in most movements performed during physical activity, and strengthening them can reduce vulnerability to lower back pain and injury.

counter-tension. In the context of movement done with a partner, the application of each partner’s body weight and force away from the other partner. Partners can use counter-tension at different levels and in different directions. Counter-tension can be contrasted with counter-balance, in which body weight and force are applied by each partner towards the other partner using a variety of body parts as points of contact.

culture. The way in which people live, think, and define themselves as a community.

defence. The practice or role of preventing opponents from scoring. See also offence. dominant hand/foot. Refers to the hand or foot that an individual feels most comfortable using. For example, a right-handed student may be more comfortable throwing with his or her right hand. The non-dominant hand or foot is the other hand or foot. It is important for students to have opportunities to practise skills with both their dominant and non-dominant hands and feet.

downward dog pose. A static balance with hands and feet on the floor and hips in the air. Hands and feet are both shoulder-width apart. Arms, legs, and back are straight, or as straight as possible, and the backs of the legs are stretched. The student pushes down through the shoulders and arms, which lengthens the spine. The hips are pushed back and up, with weight evenly distributed between hands and feet. [graphic omitted on page 211]

dynamic balance. A type of stability skill in which core strength is used to maintain balance and control of the body while moving through space. See also stability.

effort awareness. See movement concepts.

epinephrine autoinjector. A syringe used to inject potentially lifesaving epinephrine (adrenaline) into someone who is experiencing anaphylaxis. See also anaphylaxis.

execution. The action phase of movement, which includes the movements prior to producing force, including gathering momentum, and the instant when force is applied to carry out the movement skill. The body is positioned, weight is transferred, and joints work together to produce the action. See also follow-through, phases of movement, and preparation.

external stimuli affecting movement. Any force outside of the body that can have an impact on an intended movement. External stimuli could include environmental factors such as wind, sun, or temperature. It could also include factors such as music, equipment, or teammates.

fair play. An attitude or way of thinking that is based on the principles of integrity, fairness, and respect and the equitable or impartial treatment of all participants in an activity.

fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). A term used to describe a range of disabilities that may affect people whose mothers drank alcohol while they were pregnant. (From Public Health Agency of Canada, “About FASD”, www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/ fasd-etcaf/about-eng.php [accessed February 3, 2010].)

fitness. See health-related fitness and physical fitness.

fitness circuit. A series of stations, each set up for a different physical activity that targets a particular aspect of fitness; for example, a flexibility station where students work on sitting and reaching forward, or a cardiorespiratory fitness station where students work on continuous skipping. Circuits may be organized in a number of ways, including a closely structured format where each student visits every station for a specified period of time, or a less structured format where students choose stations that correspond with their fitness goals and may choose to visit some stations more than once. Music may be used as a motivator for students and as a stop/start indication to signal when it is time to change stations.

flexibility. A health-related component of physical fitness involving the ability to move a joint through its full range of motion. See also healthrelated fitness.

follow-through. The final phase of movement, which includes the movements after the instant when force is applied. In this phase, the transfer of weight is completed, movement continues in the direction of action, the movement slows down, and stability is regained. See also execution, phases of movement, and preparation.

four-point balance. Any static balance in which four body parts are touching the ground. See also three-point balance and two-point balance. [graphic omitted on page 212]

gallop. A locomotor movement in which the body moves forward or backwards. To gallop, students step forward with one foot and quickly draw the second foot up to the first foot, then repeat. Knees are bent slightly and arms stay out for balance. Galloping is a fundamental skill that can be used as students learn more complex skills. By learning to balance the body and control the motion, students can apply this action to other, more complex skills or combine it with other actions. See also skip and slide.

gender. A term that refers to those characteristics of women and men that are socially constructed. See also gender identity and sex.

gender-based violence. Any form of behaviour – including psychological, physical, and sexual behaviour – that is based on an individual’s gender and is intended to control, humiliate, or harm the individual. This form of violence is generally directed at women and girls and is based on an attitude or prejudice, which can be conscious or unconscious and which exists on the individual and institutional level, that aims to subordinate an individual or group on the basis of sex and/or gender identity.

gender identity. A person’s sense of self, with respect to being male or female. Gender identity is different from sexual orientation, and may be different from birth-assigned sex. (Refer to the Ontario Human Rights Commission’s Policy on Discrimination and Harassment because of Gender Identity, at www.ohrc.on.ca.)

give and go. A type of play used, most often in territory activities, as a strategy for maintaining possession of the object and moving it down the playing area towards the goal. During this play, Player A passes the object to Player B (“give”). Then Player A moves quickly ahead, towards the goal or an open space (“go”). Player A remains ready to receive the object back from Player B. After Player A has moved ahead, Player B tries to pass the object back. The object is now closer to the goal. [graphic omitted on page 212]

goal ball. A territory activity in which players work in teams of three to score by throwing a ball across an end goal line. Primarily played by blind and visually impaired players.

grapevine step. A step sequence used in many dances. This step can be performed in any direction – left, right, forward, back, or diagonally. A grapevine step to the right would be performed as follows. Step to the right with the right foot. Step behind with the left foot. Step to the right with the right foot again. Bring the left foot beside the right foot to finish. [graphic omitted on page 212]

harassment. A form of discrimination that may include unwelcome attention and remarks, jokes, threats, name-calling, touching, or other behaviour (including the display of pictures) that insults, offends, or demeans someone because of his or her identity. Harassment involves conduct or comments that are known to be, or should reasonably be known to be, offensive, inappropriate, intimidating, and hostile. health-related fitness. Refers to the components of physical fitness that contribute to optimal health. For the purposes of this document, the components are defined as cardiovascular fitness, flexibility, muscular endurance, and muscular strength. Body composition is a fifth component of health-related fitness.

HIV/AIDS. HIV stands for Human Immuno - deficiency Virus. This is the virus that leads to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).

homeopathy. A system of medicine in which disease is treated by giving patients tiny amounts of natural substances with the intention of stimulating the body’s natural healing abilities.

homophobia. A disparaging or hostile attitude or a negative bias, which may be overt or unspoken and which may exist at an individual and/or a systemic level, towards people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgendered (LGBT).

hop. A locomotor movement that involves taking off on one foot and landing on the same foot. The movement includes a take-off phase (preparation), a flight phase (execution), and a landing (follow-through). See also jump, leap, and phases of movement.

individual activities. Activities in which students work individually with their own equipment. In this way, opportunities for participation are maximized. In this document, the term “individual activities” is used to refer to physical activities that are not structured as games. Students can engage in these activities while also interacting with others, such as in dancing or canoeing. For more on individual activities, see pp. 28–29. See also modified activities.

insulin therapy pump. A method of delivering insulin for people with diabetes. This method includes a device with a small catheter, which is inserted under the skin, and a pump, which is worn outside the body. The pump has a reservoir and can be programmed to deliver small amounts of insulin on a particular schedule. The device has a button that can be pressed to deliver extra doses of insulin when necessary, such as at mealtimes. (Adapted from Canadian Diabetes Association, “How Do I Use Insulin?”, www.diabetes.ca/ about-diabetes/living/insulin/how/ [accessed February 3, 2010].)

jump. A locomotor movement that involves taking off and landing with two feet. The movement includes a take-off phase (preparation), a flight phase (execution), and a landing (follow-through). See also hop, leap, and phases of movement.

kendo. A physical activity from Japan that combines martial arts values with sport-like physical elements. It involves the use of bamboo swords.

knee scale. A static balance performed with both hands and one knee and lower leg as the contact points on the ground and the other leg extended behind the body. Head is up and the body is held tight for balance. See also standing scale. [graphic omitted on page 213]

leap. A locomotor movement that involves taking off from one foot and landing on the other. Leaping is performed much like running, but the flight phase is longer. See also hop, jump, and phases of movement. locomotion, locomotor movement. A type of movement skill used to move the body from one point to another in various ways. See alsomovement skills. manipulation. The act of giving force to or receiving force from objects as one sends, receives, or retains them. See also movement skills, receiving, retaining, and sending.

mental health. All aspects of a person’s well-being that affect his or her emotions, learning, and behaviour. It is important to note that mental health is not merely the absence of mental illness.

mental illness. Any emotional, behavioural, or brain-related condition that causes significant impairment in functioning as defined in standard diagnostic protocols such as the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM). (Adapted from Ministry of Children and Youth Services, A Shared Responsibility: Ontario’s Policy Framework for Child and Youth Mental Health, 2009, 22.) moderate to vigorous physical activity. The degree to which an activity is moderate to vigorous is directly related to its ability to raise the heart rate, to improve cardiorespiratory fitness, and to maintain this increase for a sustained period of time. Moderate to vigorous physical activities are aerobic in nature, enhancing the health of the heart and lungs, dependent on the frequency, intensity, time, and type of activity.

modified activities, modified games. Activities or games that have been altered from their traditional or formal structure to allow for maximum participation or to allow students of differing experiences and abilities to participate. For example, two-ontwo basketball is a modified version of basketball; multi-base baseball is a modified version of softball.

movement concepts. A framework for increasing the effectiveness of movement by helping students become more skilful, knowledgeable, and expressive in their movements. Movement concepts include body awareness, spatial awareness, effort awareness, and relationship (see p. 26 for examples).

movement principles. A set of biomechanical principles that can be applied to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of movements. The principles are related to stability, effort, and motion in different directions. Application of these principles becomes more refined as movement competence increases. (See p. 26 for examples.)

movement skills. These skills (stability, locomotion, and manipulation) are the foundation of all physical activity and are essential both to an individual’s development of effective motor skills and to the application of these skills in a wide variety of physical activities. See also locomotion, manipulation, and stability.

movement strategies. A term encompassing a variety of approaches that help a player or team attain the ultimate goal or objective of an activity or game, such as moving to an open space to be in a position to receive an object or hitting an object away from opponents to make it difficult for opponents to retrieve the object. Similar activities within game categories often employ common or similar strategies. (See p. 27 for further information.)

muscular endurance. A health-related component of physical fitness that relates to the muscle’s ability to continue to exert force over a period of time without fatigue. See also health-related fitness.

muscular strength. A health-related component of physical fitness that relates to the ability of the muscle to exert force or maximum effort. See also health-related fitness.

naturopathy. A system of medicine in which disease is treated by the use of a variety of natural remedies rather than by drugs or surgery. net/wall activities. Activities in which players send an object towards a court or target area that their opponent(s) are defending. The aim is to make it difficult for opponent(s) to return the object and to cause it to land in the target area.

nutrient. A substance that provides essential nourishment. Types of nutrients include carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. obesity. An accumulation of excess body fat. Obesity occurs when a person consumes more food energy than is needed to provide for all of the day’s activities, including work and exercise. Obesity is a risk factor in a number of chronic diseases. Achieving and maintaining a healthy weight is important for reducing the risk of those diseases and improving overall health.

offence. The practice or role of working proactively to gain an advantage and score. See also defence. open space. During game play, refers to the part of the playing area that is clear and available for movement at any given time. Players use open spaces during games to receive passes and move without

obstacles. Strategically, students may use open space differently in different categories of activities, such as hitting to open spaces in striking/fielding or net/wall activities, or running to open spaces that are close to the goal area in territory activities.

pedometer. A small, portable electronic device that automatically counts each step a person takes in a day. Some pedometers are able to multiply the number of steps by the wearer’s step length to calculate the distance the wearer has walked that day.

phases of movement. The three parts that a fundamental movement skill can be broken into: a preparation phase, an execution phase, and a follow-through phase. Practising a skill with these three phases in mind can help a student perform the skill more effectively and efficiently. See also execution, follow-through, movement skills, and preparation.

physical fitness. A state of well-being that allows people to perform daily activities with vigour, reduces the risk of health problems related to lack of physical activity, and establishes a fitness base for participation in a variety of physical activities.

Pilates. A type of physical activity focused on building core muscle strength through the use of stretches, strength-building activities, and focused breathing.

plank balance. A static balance performed with hands on the floor and shoulder width apart, and the body stretched out with the feet on the floor. The hips should be aligned so that the back and legs form a straight line, with the hips neither sagging down or sticking up. To hold this position, core muscles need to be held tight. A plank balance can also be performed in different positions, such as on the forearms instead of the hands or with the elbows bent and the hands holding the body close to the ground. See also static balance. [graphic omitted on page 215]

power. A skill-related component of physical fitness that combines strength and speed and relates to the ability to perform the greatest effort in the shortest time. See also skill-related fitness.

preparation. The initial phase of movement, which involves getting the body ready to initiate a movement. This phase includes ensuring that the feet are in a position such that they are ready to move, and lowering the centre of gravity to create a stable body position. See also execution, follow-through, and phases of movement.

problematic substance use. Refers to the use of substances in ways that are potentially harmful. The term encompasses both substance misuse, which is the use of substances in ways that are illegal or not recommended medically, and substance abuse, which involves excessive use of substances despite the physical, mental, emotional, social, legal, or economic harm that this use may cause to oneself or others.

protective factors. Traits, characteristics, or environmental contexts that research has shown to promote positive mental health in childhood or adolescence. Examples of protective factors include personal strengths (e.g., intelligence, relaxed temperament), family strengths (e.g., a supportive home environment, socio-economic advantages), and school and community strengths (e.g., safe and effective schools; participation in social groups; having at least one significant, caring relationship with an adult). Enhancement of protective factors at the individual, family, and community level is now believed to reduce the likelihood of mental health problems and illnesses later in life. See also resilience and risk factors. (Adapted from Ministry of Children and Youth Services, A Shared Responsibility: Ontario’s Policy Framework for Child and Youth Mental Health, 2009, 24.)

qigong. A type of physical exercise and meditative practice from China that uses slow movements and controlled breathing. The intent of the movements is to enhance the movement of energy throughout the body. Some of the movements are similar to ones used in t’ai chi or yoga. Qigong is pronounced “chee-gung”.

reaction time. A skill-related component of physical fitness that relates to the length of time between stimulation and response. See also skill-related fitness. ready position. A stance used in many sports and activities, in which the body is in a position that allows it to move and respond easily. Knees are bent, feet are apart, head is up, arms are out for balance, and attention is focused.

receiving. A manipulation skill that relates to the intent to catch an incoming object. Receiving skills include catching, trapping, and collecting. Basic skills associated with receiving include keeping one’s eyes on the object, anticipating where the object will arrive and moving to get into position, and preparing the body by being in a ready position with weight evenly distributed, knees bent, and a low centre of gravity. See also manipulation and ready position.

recovery time. The length of time that it takes for the heart to return to its regular (resting) rate after physical activity.

recreational activities. Physical activities that an individual or group chooses to do to make their leisure time interesting, enjoyable, and personally satisfying. Recreational activities include hiking and walking for pleasure, gardening, participating in sports, and doing a wide variety of other indoor and outdoor physical activities. (Adapted from Alberta Health and Wellness, “Maximizing the Benefits of Recreation”, www.healthyalberta.ca/ HealthyPlaces/580.htm [accessed March 1, 2010].) relationship (movement concept). See movement concepts.

resilience. The ability to recover quickly or “bounce back” from disruptive change, illness, or misfortune without being overwhelmed or acting in dysfunctional ways. Resilient people possess the skills to cope with life’s challenges, respond to stress, and move forward. Children and youth have a naturally resilient nature, but it must be nurtured and strengthened, particularly in the face of one or more risk factors for mental health problems or illness. See also protective factors and risk factors. (Adapted from Ministry of Children and Youth Services, A Shared Responsibility: Ontario’s Policy Framework for Child and Youth Mental Health, 2009, 25.)

restorative justice. A response to wrongdoing that focuses on a healing process for those affected by inappropriate behaviour and on the opportunity for the individual responsible for the wrongdoing to fully understand the impact of his or her actions, take responsibility, and have the opportunity to take action to help with the repair process. Restorative justice strategies used in schools could include peer mediation, healing circles, and group conferencing. Restorative justice is also the basis for a broader concept called restorative practices.

retaining. A manipulation skill that relates to the intent to maintain possession of an object while stationary or moving. Retaining skills include carrying (for example, holding a football while running); dribbling (for example, bouncing a basketball with a hand or controlling a soccer ball with the feet); and cradling (for example, keeping an object tucked close to the body or protecting an object while carrying it in a scoop or the pocket of a lacrosse stick). Basic skills associated with retaining include being able to change directions, controlling the object with either the hand or the foot, and maintaining control. See also manipulation.

rhythmic activities. A term encompassing a variety of movement-based activities, including dance, gymnastics, and creative movement. Music or instruments may be used to provide opportunities to move in response to a beat or sound.

risk factors. Traits, characteristics, or environmental contexts that research has shown to be predictive of mental health problems or illnesses in childhood or adolescence. Examples of risk factors include a child or youth living in poverty, having parents with limited parenting skills or mental illness, abuse of alcohol and/or drugs, the lack of experience of success in school, premature birth, or low birth weight. The effect of a given risk factor tends to be stronger when it is combined with other risk factors, may vary during different periods of a child or youth’s life, and is often cumulative. See also protective factors and resilience. (Adapted from Ministry of Children andYouth Services, A Shared Responsibility: Ontario’s Policy Framework for Child and Youth Mental Health, 2009, 24.)

rounders. A striking/fielding game in which offensive players work in teams to strike a ball, then score runs by running to bases. Fielding players work together to retrieve the ball and get offensive players out by catching the ball, tagging a base, or tagging a runner. The game is very similar to softball, with some rule and equipment variations. sacred medicines. In many Aboriginal cultures, the four sacred medicines are tobacco, cedar, sage, and sweetgrass. These medicines are used in personal and ceremonial contexts for purification of the mind, body, and spirit.

scale. See knee scale and standing scale. self-concept. The perception a person has of his or her own identity. People form their self-concept using interpretations of information they acquire about themselves through experiences and interactions with others and their environment. A person’s self-concept can be influenced by the opinions of others, reinforcement of behaviour, and explanations or understanding of one’s own behaviour or actions. Unlike self-esteem, self-concept is not positive or negative, but rather accurate or inaccurate, or extensive or narrow.

sending. A manipulation skill that relates to intent to move an object away from oneself. Sending skills include throwing, kicking, striking, punting, and volleying. Basic skills associated with sending include balancing the body to prepare, transferring body weight as the object is sent, and following through. See also manipulation and phases of movement.

sepak takraw. A net/wall game also known as kick volleyball. The game originated in Malaysia, and variations are played in other South Asian countries and around the world. It is played with a woven rattan ball or a synthetic version of this ball. Players in teams of three use the feet, knees, chest, and other body parts – but not the hands – to pass the ball to each other and move the ball over the net. seven grandfather teachings. The principles and values central to the Anishinabe People: honesty, humility, bravery/courage, wisdom, respect, truth, and love.

seven stages of life. First Nation, Métis, and Inuit cultures use a variety of conceptual frameworks, often in stages, to represent the journey of life. Each stage has its own unique challenges and gifts for the individual, the family, and the community. The seven stages of life is a framework used by the Anishinabe People.

sex. The category of male or female, based on characteristics that are biologically determined. See also gender and gender identity.

sexual orientation. A person’s sense of sexual attraction to people of the same sex, the opposite sex, or both sexes. (Refer to the Ontario Human Rights Commission’s Policy on Discrimination and Harassment because of Sexual Orientation, at www.ohrc.on.ca.)

skill-related fitness. Refers to the components of physical fitness that are related to quality of movement and enhanced performance with respect to sports and motor skills. The components are commonly defined as balance, coordination, agility, speed, power, and reaction time. Skill-related fitness is sometimes referred to as motor fitness or performance-related fitness.

skip. A locomotor movement that involves rhythmically alternating steps followed by a hop with the lead foot. Skipping can be performed forward or backwards. To skip forward, students take a step forward with one foot, hop on that foot, then step forward with the other foot and hop on that foot. Then the whole sequence is repeated. Knees are slightly bent, and arms can be moved forward and back to help with rhythm. Skipping is a more complex action than galloping or sliding and is generally best taught after students have learned to gallop and slide. See also gallop and slide.

sledge hockey. A territory game similar to ice hockey, played with six players on each team, including a goalie. Players sit on a sledge, which is a narrow platform with skate blades attached to the bottom, and propel themselves using two specially constructed hockey sticks that have picks on the end. The specially designed sledges can be adapted to meet the needs of each player. Primarily played by players with a wide range of physical disabilities, including but not limited to wheelchair users, amputees, people with spinal cord injuries, and people with cerebral palsy.

slide. A locomotor movement in which the body moves sideways. To slide, students step to the side with one foot and quickly draw the second foot over to the first foot, then repeat. Knees are bent slightly, and arms stay out for balance. Sliding is a fundamental skill that allows students to make quick lateral (sideways) movements in a number of activities. See also gallop.

smudging. A practice used by some First Nations, involving fanning smoke from herbs such as sage or sweetgrass over their bodies. The practice is used to cleanse them of bad feelings, get rid of negative thoughts and energy, and provide a sense of physical, emotional, mental, and spiritual renewal.

spatial awareness. See movement concepts.

specialized equipment. A term encompassing a variety of materials designed to help students with a variety of needs to participate in physical activity. For example, specialized equipment might include balls of different sizes, colours, weights, and/or textures to make the ball easier to see, feel, or catch, or balls with a bell inside to help a student who is unable to see to track the ball using the auditory cue. speed. A skill-related component of physical fitness that relates to the ability to move from one point to another within a short period of time. See also skill-related fitness.

stability. Stability skills involve the ability to balance the body in one place (static) or keep the body balanced while moving (dynamic) by sensing a shift in the relationship of the body parts and altering body position to maintain balance. See also dynamic balance, movement skills, and static balance.

standing scale. A static balance performed with one foot as the contact point on the ground and one leg extended behind the body. Head is up, arms are out, and the body is held tight for balance. See also knee scale. [graphic omitted on page 218]

static balance. A stability skill in which the body maintains a desired shape in a stationary position. See also stability.

stereotype. A false or generalized, and usually negative, conception of a group of people that results in the unconscious or conscious categorization of each member of that group, without regard for individual differences. Stereotyping may be based on race, ancestry, place of origin, colour, ethnic origin, citizenship, creed, sex, sexual orientation, age, marital status, family status, or disability, as set out in the Ontario Human Rights Code, or on the basis of other, similar factors.

stickhandling. A method of retaining or maintaining possession of an object while moving, using a stick such as a hockey, field hockey, or ringette stick. See also manipulation and retaining.

stork stand. A static balance performed by standing on one foot and holding the other foot against the supporting leg. Arms may be out to the sides or held above the head, or the hands may be placed on the waist. [graphic omitted on page 218]

striking/fielding activities. Activities in which striking players try to score by striking an object and running to designated playing areas (bases) while fielding players try to prevent them from scoring by retrieving the object and returning it to stop the play.

systems thinking. A method of thinking and problem-solving in which elements are considered as part of a complex whole, rather than in isolation. Analysing the ways in which elements interact with and depend on each other can yield greater understanding than looking at each element separately.

talk test. A simple assessment tool that students can use to monitor their level of exertion during moderate to vigorous activity to ensure that they are at a level that is appropriate for their training and participation

target activities. Activities in which players score by avoiding obstacles to get an object closer to a target or hit a target more often than their opponents.

tchoukball. A territory game in which players score by throwing and bouncing a ball on a small trampoline-like goal set up at each end of the playing area. Tchoukball is a no-contact game.

territory activities. Activities that involve controlling an object, keeping it away from opponents, and moving it into position to score. The same playing area is shared by both offensive and defensive players as they work to prevent the other team from scoring.

three-point balance. Any static balance in which three body parts are touching the ground. See also four-point balance and two-point balance. [graphic omitted on page 219]

training principles. The factors that need to be considered for improving and maintaining fitness. A handy mnemonic is the FITT principle: frequency (how often different body parts are exercised); intensity (the level of physical exertion); time (duration of the activity); and type of exercise. The concepts in the FITT principle are tied to the principles of overload (working the muscles more than accustomed), specificity (improving specific body parts with specific activities), and progression (gradually increasing the amount or intensity of activity).

travelling skills. See locomotion, locomotor movement.

two-point balance. Any static balance in which two body parts are touching the ground. See also four-point balance and three-point balance. [graphic omitted on page 219]

v-sit. A static balance performed with the buttocks on the ground and legs held tight and together in the air. Arms can support the body or be held at the sides or over the head. See also static balance. [graphic omitted on page 219]

warm-up. The process of preparing the body for more vigorous activity by moving muscles and joints lightly and gradually increasing intensity of movement.

The Ministry of Education wishes to acknowledge the contribution of the many individuals, groups, and organizations that participated in the development and refinement of this curriculum policy document. 



